
Abstract—Smart house, is a set of devices and smart applications designed to provide a comfortable and safe environment 
for its residents. Home devices have the ability to communicate 
with each other. Through a network of networks. This network 
of devices is called internet of things (IoT) . Our contribution 
is to propose an architecture based on an autonomic and 
intelligent object using multi-Agent systems. We have created an 
environment that simulates a smart home with a range of devices 
and sensors.The agent manages the built-in device. Through 
user orders and information captured by sensors. The home is 
controlled remotely via the Internet. Through the smartphone. 
Keywords—Internet of Things (IoT), Smart house, Multi-agent 
system, Ambient intelligence. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Smart house is to connect the various devices and systems 
in the house together so that they can be controlled from 
anywhere and bring about the desired interaction among them. 
These devices are things connected via a network that has a 
window on the Internet. This network of things called Internet 
of things (IoT). The IoT can be applied to several areas [1]: 
smart cities (cities totally or partially connected to the Internet 
enabling them to optimize their capacities such as trafﬁc 
management and water treatment) [2], Health, wearables (all 
portable technologies such as connected watches and locators), 
transport, and also the work places, production and houses. 
The automation [3] is the set of techniques used in the 
buildings that makes it possible to centralize the control of the 
different systems in the house. The principle of automation 
is to make sure that the house has becomes intelligent [4], 
independent, and it reﬂects on itself. The purpose of the 
automation is to improve daily comfort by automating or 
remotely managing recurring tasks. To do this, communication 
system must be integrating into household appliances, for 
example: we can open the windows of our house from the 
ofﬁce and it goes with the heating, security system, lighting, 
home appliance and many other objects. 
To do experiments we created an environment that simulates an intelligent house, containing the most important 
things that might be in an ordinary house. Each device of this 
environment is managed by a smart agent. The house becomes 
a multi-agent system. Enjoy all the characteristics of multiagent systems of cooperation, organization and intelligence. 
The paper is organized as follows. The section 1 will 
introduce the area of our research work. In section 2, we brieﬂy 
c 
978-1-5386-3269-7/17/$31.00 2017 IEEE 
discuss related works. Section 3 describes the proposed system 
architecture and its features. The section 4, outlines the system 
implementation of the IoT MAS for ambient intelligence. 
Finally, some conclusions and perspectives are presented. 
II. RELATED WORKS 
In [5], the authors proposed architecture for smart house 
integration IoT with web-service using JSON for data exchange between component of system and Zigbee technology 
for networking. In [6], the authors proposed ubiquitous home 
controlled and monitoring system using a smart phone. In 
[7],the authors proposed a multi agent architecture providing 
autonomic characteristics for the internet of things (IoT). In 
[8], the authors developed a framework for smart home using 
constrained application protocol which provides a method to 
control sensors and actuators remotely. 
The main and important limitation for the architectures 
proposed in [5], [6], [8] is the rigid structure in levels for the 
system design. Indeed, there is no modularity which makes 
operations such as updating, deleting and adding so difﬁcult. 
Moreover, there is no cooperation between the system components. The objects are however heterogeneous since there 
are different apparatuses so the objects are not autonomous. 
In [6], The system is centralized and the control is ﬂexible but 
the system in general not so. In [8] we know that the agents 
need a powerful processor and large memory (RAM), but most 
of the things lacking in it. So multi-agent system cannot be 
incorporated into the object. In the next section we introduce a 
new design of smart house based IoT using multi-agent system. 
III. PROPOSED ARCHITECTURE 
1) User: The main actors who will be the ﬁnal users of the 
system, and can the person who lives in the house, his family 
or the technicians. 
2) AmbientEnvironment: the ambient environment consists 
of sensors, actuators and the components of the house. These 
objects are able to communicate to provide data (measurements) or produce a sequence of commands 
3) IoT Gateway: It is a device allowing to link the house 
(things) with external networks (the Internet). 
2017 International Conference on Mathematics and information 
Figure 1. General Architecture of our System 
IV. AGENT SYSTEM 
The component agent [9] is embedded on an object such 
as (TV, air conditioner and light), The component can be controlled autonomously and its state can be changed according 
to the state of the environment and its objects. 
Figure 2. Concrete architecture of the agent embarked in the object 
The health care agent is embedded on a physical component, it can control the state of health of user autonomously 
and alert the user if there are important changes or to remind 
him the dates of taking of medicines, as it can demand the 
help from the third part in the case of critical health to the 
user. 
Figure 3. Concrete Architecture of the Agent “Health care” 
The security agent task is to do act the existence of a 
criminal in the house. Only the agent’s tasks in risk monitoring 
c 
978-1-5386-3269-7/17/$31.00 2017 IEEE 
information Technology, Adrar, Algeria – December 4 - 5, 2017 202 
are not limited artiﬁcial. It can control accidents such as ﬁres 
and gas leaks. 
Figure 4. Concrete architecture of the Security agent 
The IoT Gateway [10] is an agent aim to standardize the 
information coming from the ambient environment for the 
perception of agents. This calibration is necessary because of 
the heterogeneity of the protocols of the various manufacturers. 
Thus, the MAS (Muli-agent system) perceives and acts on the 
ambient environment through the gateway without worrying 
about the format of the perceived data. 
Figure 5. Concrete Architecture of The Agent Embarks In Gateway 
V. SIMULATION 
Our Smart house consists of objects and sensors, such as 
two rooms occupied by lamps, a living room occupied by 
a television, air conditioners, temperature sensor, a kitchen 
contains a cook, fridge, sensor of temperature.All these devices 
are connected objects. They are controlled by a mobile phone. 
It is managed through the integrated agent. 
A. Mobile Application 
The role of mobile application is remote control of the 
environment and communication environment-user. 
1) Control Application: the control application plays the 
role of ”remote control”, it consists of sending orders to the 
remote system via a transmission link (IP networks) using the 
UDP / IP protocol. It makes it possible to face practically realtime situations. For example: 
One of the children of the house forgot his keys. One 
of the parents can from a smartphone open the gate, 
unlock the front door and deactivate the alarm; 
A delivery is expected during the day. The owner 
can let the driver access to the garage so that the 
2017 International Conference on Mathematics and information 
Figure 6. Simulation Window of Your System With Actuator Objects 
parcel(tarde) is deposited there, and communicate with 
him. 
The following ﬁgure shows the control application that simulates the ambient environment. 
Figure 7. Mobile Control Application 
B. Setting Application 
As our system is an environment that simulates the smart 
house, we also need to simulate sensors (presence, breakdown, 
gas leak, maintaining a given temperature in the house) 
Figure 8. Setting Application 
c 
978-1-5386-3269-7/17/$31.00 2017 IEEE 
information Technology, Adrar, Algeria – December 4 - 5, 2017 203 
VI. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we introduced a smart environment based 
agent system using IoT, that simulates an intelligent house, 
controlled by remote home, through a smartphone. We also 
explained our conceptual architecture of our system and the 
structure , functionalities of each device in this house. As 
perspectives of this research, work we want to create an 
environment that helps researchers in smart homes and Internet 
of things, to do their research by creating an API. In other axe, 
we try to use mobile agents to exchange information between 
the ambient environment and smart phone. 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. Atzori, A. Iera, and G. Morabito, “The internet of things: A survey,” 
Computer networks, vol. 54, no. 15, pp. 2787–2805, 2010. 
[2] A. Zanella, N. Bui, A. Castellani, L. Vangelista, and M. Zorzi, “Internet 
of things for smart cities,”IEEEInternetofThingsjournal, vol. 1, no. 1, 
pp. 22–32, 2014. 
[3] M. Ruta, F. Scioscia, E. Di Sciascio, and G. Loseto, “Semanticbased enhancement of iso/iec 14543-3 eib/knx standard for building 
automation,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 7, no. 4, 
pp. 731–739, 2011. 
[4] L. Jiang, D.-Y. Liu, and B. Yang, “Smart home research,” in Machine 
Learning and Cybernetics, 2004. Proceedings of 2004 International 
Conference on, vol. 2. IEEE, 2004, pp. 659–663. 
[5] M. Soliman, T. Abiodun, T. Hamouda, J. Zhou, and C.-H. Lung, 
“Smart home: Integrating internet of things with web services and cloud 
computing,” in Cloud Computing Technology and Science (CloudCom), 
2013 IEEE 5th International Conference on, vol. 2. IEEE, 2013, pp. 
317–320. 
[6] R. Piyare, “Internet of things: ubiquitous home control and monitoring 
system using android based smart phone,” International Journal of 
Internet of Things, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 5–11, 2013. 
[7] P. Leong and L. Lu, “Multiagent web for the internet of things,” 
in Information Science and Applications (ICISA), 2014 International 
Conference on. IEEE, 2014, pp. 1–4. 
[8] M. Joshi and B. Kaur, “Web integrated smart home infrastructure using 
internet of things,” International Journal of Engineering Research and 
General Science, vol. 3, no. 6, 2015. 
[9] T. Kato, R. Chiba, H. Takahashi, and T. Kinoshita, “Agent-oriented 
cooperation of iot devices towards advanced logistics,” in Computer 
Software and Applications Conference (COMPSAC), 2015 IEEE 39th 
Annual, vol. 3. IEEE, 2015, pp. 223–227. 
[10] S. Guoqiang, C. Yanming, Z. Chao, and Z. Yanxu, “Design and 
implementation of a smart iot gateway,” in Green Computing and 
Communications (GreenCom), 2013 IEEE and Internet of Things 
(iThings/CPSCom), IEEE International Conference on and IEEE Cyber, 
Physical and Social Computing. IEEE, 2013, pp. 720–723. 