
Abstract— A trusted and active community aided and 
supported by the Internet of Things (IoT) is a key factor in food 
waste reduction and management. This paper proposes an IoT 
based context aware framework which can capture real-time 
dynamic requirements of both vendors and consumers and 
perform real-time match-making based on captured data. We 
describe our proposed reference framework and the notion of 
smart food sharing containers as enabling technology in our 
framework. A prototype system demonstrates the feasibility of 
a proposed approach using a smart container with embedded 
sensors. 
Keywords—Internet of Things (IoT), Sensors, Food Waste 
Management (FWM), Context, Context-awareness 
I. INTRODUCTION 
In 2016, it’s been revealed that 1 in 6 Australians had to deal 
with food insecurity in the past 12 months [1]. 33% of those 
who sought food relief were children. Overall, 8% of increase 
in people who sought food relief is recorded in 2015. Another 
report has revealed that 795 million of world’s population are 
undernourished [2]. Food insecurity has both physical and 
psychological impacts on a person’s life which could be short 
term or long term. Tiredness, loss of weight, loss of focus, 
exposure to illnesses are some of the physical impacts, and 
stress, loss of confidence, sadness and loss of hope are some 
of the psychological impacts on a person’s life [1]. In 
contrast, few other studies have released staggering statistics 
on food loss and waste both locally and globally [3-5].This 
clearly indicates that if food loss and waste can be managed 
efficiently, it will have a large impact in reducing the number 
of people who are undernourished. 
Our critical analysis on popular existing non-ICT 
based systems, ICT based systems and different scenarios has 
exposed their short comings, strengths and approaches 
towards dealing in reducing food waste. 
This paper proposes a novel approach towards 
efficient food waste reduction via an IoT enabled dynamic 
and real-time match-making system  which  addresses the 
strengths   and   shortcomings   identified   in   the   above 
1 
Those who supply excess food 
2 
Those who consume excess food 
978-1-5090-6785-5/18/ 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Cornell University Library. Downloaded on September 02,2020 at 15:13:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
vendors , to facilitate sharing with consumers . Although the 
concepts are proposed for the Food Wastage Management 
(FWM) domain, our approach can be adopted, customized or 
extended to manage other resources as well. 
The structure of this paper is as follows. Section 2 
summarizes the strengths and weaknesses of existing ICT 
based food wastage management systems. The third section 
describes the overall conceptual architecture of the proposed 
framework. In the fourth section, we take a deep look into the 
concept of a Smart Container, a prototype and some results 
are presented as well. In the final section, a conclusion and 
future work are presented which foresights the evolution of 
our proposed system. 
II. RELATED WORK 
A summary of how ICT has been utilized by some of the 
popular existing systems is presented in Table 1. This 
illustrates how different systems have utilized ICT to perform 
match-making between food vendors and needy consumers, 
the use of social media and other mechanisms in promoting 
and building trust in the community, the geographical 
coverage by each system as well as their approach in deciding 
the consumers (who should receive the donations). 
 
Table 1 Different ICT usage of analyzed ICT based systems and 
tools 
No Covered Trust Biased Social Match 
Geogra- measur- consum- Media making of 
phical ing er Usage vendors 
Area mechani decision and 
sm consumers 
based on 
3 AUS No No Raise Location 
1 
public public awareness 
data data 
available 
4 GBR No No Raise  Shopping 
2 
public awareness, list 
 
3 
Foodbank Local 
4 
Foodbank App 
/$31.00 © 2018 by IEEE 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Cornell University Library. Downloaded on September 02,2020 at 15:13:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
 
data updates via Location 
available FB (future) (future) 
5 AUS No No Raise No public 
3 
public public awareness data 
data data 
6 DEU, Referring Yes Raise Location 
4 
NLD, and awareness 
 
CHE, contributAUT ion 
(more statistics 
possible) 
7 GBR, Anonym- Yes Raise Location, 
5 
NLD ous awareness food, non(more rating food, 
possible) wanted 
8 USA Rating partially Raise Location 
6 
Friends awareness, 
(North) 
crowd 
shipping 
9 ITA Rating partially Raise Location 
7 
removed awareness 
10 Global Rating, Yes Authentica-  Location, 
8 
subscript- tion and Food 
ion, raise category, 
reviews awareness price, 
and friendship, 
Friends ownership, 
availability 
, 
subscriptions, 
11 AUS Rating Yes Raise Location 
9 
awareness 
12 USA No partially Raise Location, 
10 
(New public awareness TransportaEngland) data tion, 
available quality, 
instructions 
13 GBR No partially Promotion Location, 
11 
public and raise food type 
data awareness 
available 
14 USA No No Raise Location, 
12 
(Chicago public awareness product 
& data types, time 
Champai available and 
gn) schedule 
15 USA Rating, No Raise Location, 
13 
award awareness supply, 
program, demand, 
feedback capacity 
16 DNK, Free Yes Raise Location 
14 
GBR, purchase awareness 
USA, when a 
AUS, store is 
FRA, introducDEU, ed 
NOR, 
CHE 
5 
SecondBite 
6 
FoodSharing.de 
7 
Olio 
8 
Food Cowboy 
9 
Bring the Food 
10 
RipeNearMe 
11 
Neighbour Flavor 
978-1-5090-6785-5/18/ 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Cornell University Library. Downloaded on September 02,2020 at 15:13:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
USA Volume No Raise  Amount, 
17 
15 
based awareness food type, 
discounts location, 
, time, 
Anonym- storage& 
ous freezer 
feedback capacity 
Overall it can be stated that almost all the systems lack the 
use of IoT in capturing real-time dynamic context data of the 
donations, and most of them are not context-aware in decision 
making which results in inefficiencies in food distribution 
and notifications to consumers about excess food, bias or 
inaccurate decisions about the distribution of donations. Also, 
although there have been several attempts in building trust 
and reputation within the community they lack a trust and 
reputation building and measuring mechanism which could 
actively collaborate with a fraud detection and prevention 
mechanism. Fraud detection and prevention system is an 
essential part of the system to prevent misuse of donations by 
several parties as identified via several studies [6-9]. With the 
knowledge gained via analyzing existing systems a new 
framework (and architecture) is designed to address the 
shortcomings of existing systems while building on the 
strengths they already have. 
III. A PROPOSED FRAMEWORK 
The proposed framework consists of four main components 
which are Virtual Marketplace, Data Management Engine, 
Recommendation Engine and Trust, Reputation and Fraud 
Detection and Prevention Engine. This is illustrated in Figure 
1. 
A Virtual Marketplace is designed as a platform 
which facilitates the creation of profiles, registering of 
requirements and donations, and receiving recommendations. 
Vendors and consumers can interchange their roles due to the 
context-awareness of the system and the system not only 
considers human consumption of surplus food but also other 
uses such as composting and bio-materials/processing. This 
is open for all the stages of the Food Supply Chain (FSC). 
Data Management Engine handles all the data 
related operations in the system. This enables coexistence and 
collaboration between systems by importing profiles and 
transaction data from existing systems to build and enhance 
profiles. Furthermore, it can automatically extract data from 
the web and social media with the consent of users to improve 
the context knowledge of each user, which prevents users 
from filling lengthy forms at the registration process. In 
addition, collection of sensor data is handled by this Engine. 
Moreover, it handles all the data storing, retrieval and update 
operations.  The  four  databases  store  profiles,  donations 
 
12 
Spolier Alert 
13 
Plan ZHeroes 
14 
Zero Percent 
15 
Food Rescue US 
16 
Too Good To Go 
17 
Go Copia 
/$31.00 © 2018 by IEEE 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Cornell University Library. Downloaded on September 02,2020 at 15:13:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
related  data,  transaction  history  and  knowledge  gained 
through analysis for future improvements. 
Recommendation Engine handles all the matchmaking between vendors and consumers. An initial matchmaking is performed based on the profile and requirements 
of resources by both parties which is continuously monitored 
and improved based on real-time data extracted from sensors. 
This is then sent to Analytics Engine to analyze based on the 
transaction history and knowledge base. After the analysis, 
optimized recommendations are sent back to the 
Recommendation Engine where final matching will occur 
based on this new knowledge and will be sent to the Virtual 
Marketplace, which will notify interacting parties. This 
Recommendation Engine considers  both vendor’s and 
consumer’s requirements when executing the match-making 
algorithm which aims to guarantee both parties’ requirements 
are satisfied. Analytics Engine will store the new knowledge 
gained for future references. Existing systems can use this 
framework as vendors or consumers to find food relief or post 
donations on behalf of their clients and the match-making 
will occur between these systems’ users and results will be 
Figure 1 Proposed Co 
978-1-5090-6785-5/18/ 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Cornell University Library. Downloaded on September 02,2020 at 15:13:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
sent to those systems establishing collaboration between 
them. 
Trust, Reputation and Fraud Detection and Prevention Engine 
detects fraud and builds trust and reputation based on 
personal information, domain behavior and transaction 
information. This will guarantee a trusted and active local 
community who works efficiently towards reducing and 
minimizing food waste. This will assist in reducing fraud 
associated with charities, their staff and consumers which 
were discussed earlier in this paper. 
As the initial phase, a Smart Container is designed 
to capture context data of the donations via several sensors. 
This is further described in the next section of this paper. 
IV. SMART FOOD CONTAINER 
Smart Food Container is a container equipped with state of 
the art sensors which can automatically capture and transmit 
the context data of the food donations dropped into it. Food 
donations dropped into the Smart Food Container will be 
detected and the information shared on our Virtual 
Marketplace framework so that consumers can be notified 
 
onceptual Architecture 
/$31.00 © 2018 by IEEE 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Cornell University Library. Downloaded on September 02,2020 at 15:13:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
and consumers can understand the context of the food 
available for donation. The idea is to automate the sharing of 
excess food via such containers- users only need to drop their 
excess food into the container and the system does the rest. 
Our conceptual Smart Food Container contains a 
distance sensor and a light sensor to detect the opening of the 
box, a weight sensor to detect that a new item is dropped 
inside and to calculate the weight of the items inside, a RFID 
reader to read RFID tags, a temperature sensor to capture the 
temperature inside, humidity and air pressure sensors, a GPS 
sensor to locate the Smart Container’s location, a camera to 
capture and identify the food items inside and a WIFI enabled 
Raspberry Pi (or Arduino), which captures data from the 
sensors and transmit to the distribution center via internet. 
Figure 2 illustrates the conceptual Smart Container. 
 
Figure 2 Smart Container 
 
This can be extended to contain several such smart containers 
inside a larger container as illustrated in Figure 3. Each 
container can have specific sensors for the type of food items 
contained in them such as Fresh Produce, Deli, Sea Food and 
Meat and grocery products. This enables capturing more 
accurate and specific context data relevant to each type of 
food item. For an instance, temperature and humidity sensors 
are essential to detect the temperature of Deli, Fresh Produce 
and Sea Food and Meat containers to keep the food items 
edible for a longer period whereas it is of not that importance 
to the Grocery Products container. 
 
Figure 3 Extended Smart Container 
 
An initial prototype was designed and implemented to prove 
the concept of a Smart Container. Raspberry Pi Camera and 
a DHT 11 sensor was used to capture the images of donations, 
humidity and temperature inside the Smart Food Container. 
Figure 4 depicts the sensors used for the prototype. 
978-1-5090-6785-5/18/ 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Cornell University Library. Downloaded on September 02,2020 at 15:13:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
 
 
Figure 4 Camera and DHT11 sensor 
Figure 5 depicts the top and side views of the prototyped 
Smart Container. 
 
Figure 5 Prototype 
Figure 6 is an image of a donation captured by the Raspberry 
Pi camera. Image processing to identify the items is not 
considered in the initial prototype. 
 
Figure 6 Donation captured 
 
A client-server architecture is designed using socket 
programing to communicate between the Raspberry Pi and 
the Server. An initial test was performed in a local network 
to prove the concept. Figure 7 illustrates the communication 
between Raspberry Pi and the server. Sensor readings are 
performed in 30 seconds intervals and the data is transferred 
to the server with the time when the data was captured by 
Raspberry Pi. 
 
 
Figure 7 client-server communication 
/$31.00 © 2018 by IEEE 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Cornell University Library. Downloaded on September 02,2020 at 15:13:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Further tests were performed to check how the environmental 
variables, humidity and temperature changes over a period of 
half an hour when the container’s lid is open and when it is 
closed. Readings are performed in 30 seconds intervals as 
mentioned above and the tests were carried out in an indoor 
environment. 
The first test was performed with the lid of the 
container opened and the readings were plotted as shown in 
Figure 8. Humidity has changed at the beginning and has 
remained steady in the middle and has changed again towards 
the end. The sensor and the items in the container were 
directly exposed to the changes in the environment. 
 
Figure 8 Humidity variation when lid is open 
 
Temperature variations are illustrated in Figure 9. 
Temperature has remained steady except for a spike during 
the whole time. 
 
Figure 9 Temperature variation when lid is open 
 
The next experiment was performed when the lid was closed. 
Apart for the initial changes, humidity has remained steady 
during the half an hour. With the lid closed it has provided a 
controlled or stable level of humidity for the items within the 
container. Figure 10 illustrates the results of humidity 
variations over time. 
978-1-5090-6785-5/18/ 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Cornell University Library. Downloaded on September 02,2020 at 15:13:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
 
 
Figure 10 Humidity variations when lid is closed 
 
Figure 11 illustrates the temperature variations when the lid 
is closed. As with the previous experiment when the lid was 
open, temperature inside the container has remained steady. 
These experiments have provided an initial insight into the 
potential environments these Smart Containers and their food 
items will be exposed to. Different environments provide 
different challenges in preserving the quality of food items. 
Different thresholds can be set to safe guard the food quality 
by identifying the type of food and the environments they are 
exposed to. These readings from the sensors provide realtime dynamic context-data about the environments the food 
is exposed to. For an instance, thresholds can be set for both 
temperature and humidity levels for a certain food item/ 
donation and sensors will monitor the environment and issue 
warnings if the temperature and humidity levels are not 
within the required thresholds. This allows the users to take 
actions when necessary and food items remain edible for their 
maximum usage period and prevents wastage via constant 
monitoring and reporting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11 Temperature variations when lid is closed 
 
 
We have shown that a wide range of events and conditions 
related to the food container can be tracked – automating the 
process of updating consumers about food available for 
donation. We imagine thousands of such food containers 
made available for people who would like to donate food and 
the smart food container will be the device to “link” into our 
proposed framework. 
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper proposed an IoT based novel, real-time and 
dynamic  framework  to  efficiently  distribute  excess  food 
/$31.00 © 2018 by IEEE 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Cornell University Library. Downloaded on September 02,2020 at 15:13:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
which would otherwise end up in waste lands. This 
framework addresses the weaknesses identified in the 
existing systems as well as maintains the strengths they have. 
The concept and an initial prototype of a Smart Food 
Container was introduced. Although current focus is on the 
excess food these can be used to identify the best environment 
for non-excess food as well as for other resources for 
donation. 
Weight, GPS, Air pressure, Light and RFID readers 
will be added to the Smart Container in the next phase of the 
implementation. This will enable to gather more accurate 
context-data about the Smart Food Container’s environment, 
including actions taken with the food and the condition of the 
food. Ultimately these allows real-time, dynamic, intelligent 
and context-aware match-making between the vendors/food 
items and consumers. In the future, drones (on land or flying) 
can also pick up such excess food from the Smart Food 
Containers and help deliver them to matched consumers. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Foodbank,  "Foodbank  Hunger   Report  2016,"  2016, 
Available: http://www.foodbank.org.au/wpcontent/uploads/2016/05/Foodbank-Hunger-Report2016.pdf. 
[2] I. FAO, WFP, "The State of Food Insecurity in the World 
Meeting the 2015 international  hunger targets: taking 
stock of uneven progress," Food and Agriculture 
Organization    of   the   United   Nations,   Rome2015, 
978-1-5090-6785-5/18/ 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Cornell University Library. Downloaded on September 02,2020 at 15:13:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Available: http://www.fao.org/3/a-i4646e.pdf, Accessed 
on: 24/04/2017. 
[3] Fao, "Global Initiative on Food Loss and Waste 
Reduction," Food and Agriculture Organization of the 
United Nations (FAO)2015 2015, Available:  
http://www.fao.org/3/a-i4068e.pdf, Accessed on: 
2016/08/09/. 
[4] J. Gustavsson,  C.  Cederberg, U.  Sonesson,  R. V. 
Otterdijk, and A. Meybeck, "Global food losses and food 
waste – Extent, causes and prevention," FAO, Rome2011 
2011, Available: 
http://www.fao.org/docrep/014/mb060e/mb060e00.pdf, 
Accessed on: 2016/08/09/. 
[5] S. Victoria, "Sustainability Victoria Annual Report 201415," Sustainability Victoria2015, Available:  
www.sustainability.vic.gov.au//media/resources/documents/who-we-are/business-plan-  
and-annual-report/sustainability-victoria-annual-report-   
2014-15.pdf?la=en. 
[6] S. Bird, "Unpalatable truth about food banks the Left finds 
so hard to swallow: Political football and undeserving 
claimants distract from the many who are in genuine 
need," in Daily Mail, ed, 2014. 
[7] S. M. Simon Murphy, "No ID, no checks... and vouchers 
for sob stories: The truth behind those shock food bank 
claims," in Daily Mail, ed, 2014. 
[8] m. hore, "Geelong charity Hunger for Knowledge asked 
welfare groups to pay for food," in Geelong Advertiser, 
ed, 2014. 
[9] C. Walsh, "Restaurateur banned from Foodbank 
dealings," in Herald Sun, ed. Northern Territory, 
Australia, 2016. 
/$31.00 © 2018 by IEEE 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Cornell University Library. Downloaded on September 02,2020 at 15:13:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 