 
ABSTRACT 
Developed as a simple and cost-effective wirey router 
less technology for best effort services, IEEE 
802.11 has gained popularity at an unprecedented rate. However, due to the lack of built-in 
quality of service support, IEEE 802.11 experiences serious challenges in meeting the demands 
of multimedia services and applications. This 
article surveys 802.11 QoS schemes, including 
service differentiation in the MAC layer, admission control and bandwidth reservation in MAC 
and higher layers, and link adaptation in the 
physical layer, designed to meet these challenges 
by providing the necessary enhancements for the 
required QoS. Furthermore, the article addresses 
issues that arise when end-to-end QoS has to be 
guaranteed in today’s pervasive heterogeneous 
wired-cum-wireless networks. Among these chalIEEE 802.11 has gained 
lenges, protocol interoperability, multihop 
scheduling, full mobility support, and seamless 
popularity at an 
vertical handoff among multiple mobile/wireless 
interfaces are specifically addressed. 
unprecedented rate. 
However, due to the 
INTRODUCTION 
Compared with a wired infrastructure, wireless 
lack of built-in quality of 
LAN (WLAN) has unique advantages, such as 
broadband bandwidth capability and low deployservice support, 
ment cost. Thanks to the technology provided by 
IEEE 802.11, the WLAN market is experiencing 
IEEE 802.11 experiexplosive growth in hot spots such as hotels, hospitals, and campuses, to mention just a few. 
ences serious challenges 
With WLANs being deployed in an unlimited 
way as access points, wireless users can access 
in meeting the demands 
real-time and Internet services virtually anytime, 
anywhere, while enjoying the flexibility of mobilof multimedia services 
ity and guaranteed connectivity. 
IEEE 802.11 is designed for best effort serand applications. 
vices only. The lack of a built-in mechanism for 
support of real-time services makes it very difficult to provide quality of service (QoS) guarantees for throughput-sensitive and delay-sensitive 
multimedia applications. Therefore, modification 
of existing 802.11 standards is necessary. 
This work was supported Although IEEE 802.11e is being proposed as the 
in part by the NSF grant upcoming standard for the enhancement of serIIS-0237954 on vice differentiation, QoS guarantee in 802.11 is 
CAREER: Animation still a very challenging problem and needs furDatabases. ther study [1]. 
6 1536-1284/04/$20.00 © 2004 IEEE 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Consortium - Algeria (CERIST). Downloaded on June 17,2022 at 22:12:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
schemes such as service differentiation in the 
Developed as a simple and cost-effective wire- medium access control (MAC) layer, admission 
less technology for best effort services, IEEE control and bandwidth reservation in MAC as 
802.11 has gained popularity at an unprecedent- well as higher layers, and link adaptation in the 
ed rate. However, due to the lack of built-in physical layer. These schemes significantly enrich 
quality of service support, IEEE 802.11 experi- the enhancement of QoS from different aspects. 
ences serious challenges in meeting the demands Furthermore, many issues arise in smoothly proof multimedia services and applications. This viding end-to-end QoS guarantees while accessarticle surveys 802.11 QoS schemes, including ing wired networks from wireless and vice versa. 
service differentiation in the MAC layer, admis- Among these challenges, protocol interoperabilision control and bandwidth reservation in MAC ty, multihop scheduling, full mobility support, 
and higher layers, and link adaptation in the and seamless vertical handoff among multiple 
physical layer, designed to meet these challenges mobile/wireless interfaces are discussed. 
by providing the necessary enhancements for the This article is organized as follows. We prorequired QoS. Furthermore, the article addresses vide an overview of the IEEE 802.11 standard. 
issues that arise when end-to-end QoS has to be We discuss the existing QoS schemes for 802.11 
guaranteed in today’s pervasive heterogeneous networks. We introduce design challenges and 
wired-cum-wireless networks. Among these chal- future work. Finally, we conclude this article. 
lenges, protocol interoperability, multihop 
scheduling, full mobility support, and seamless 
A 
N OVERVIEW OF IEEE 802.11 
vertical handoff among multiple mobile/wireless 
IEEE 802.11 is the leading standard for wireless 
LAN [2]. It adopts the standard 802 logical link 
control (LLC) protocol but provides optimized 
physical layer (PHY) and medium access control 
Compared with a wired infrastructure, wireless (MAC) sublayers for wireless communications. 
LAN (WLAN) has unique advantages, such as 802.11 specifies two physical layers: direct 
broadband bandwidth capability and low deploy- sequence spread spectrum (DSSS) and frequenment cost. Thanks to the technology provided by cy hopping spread spectrum (FHSS). Based on 
IEEE 802.11, the WLAN market is experiencing the transmission technologies and operating 
explosive growth in hot spots such as hotels, hos- spectrum, the later revisions of 802.11 can be 
pitals, and campuses, to mention just a few. classified into three categories: 802.11a (orthogWith WLANs being deployed in an unlimited onal frequency-division multiplexing, OFDM, 5 
way as access points, wireless users can access GHz), 802.11b (high-rateDSSS, HR/DSSS, 2.4 
real-time and Internet services virtually anytime, GHz), and 802.11g (OFDM, 2.4 GHz). 802.11b 
anywhere, while enjoying the flexibility of mobil- is based on HR/DSSS and operates at the 2.4 
GHz industrial, scientific, and medical (ISM) 
IEEE 802.11 is designed for best effort ser- band with transmission rate from 1 to 11 Mb/s. 
vices only. The lack of a built-in mechanism for 802.11a is based on OFDM and uses 5 GHz 
support of real-time services makes it very diffi- unlicensed national information infrastructure 
cult to provide quality of service (QoS) guaran- (U-NII) band in America with a transmission 
tees for throughput-sensitive and delay-sensitive rate of 6–54 Mb/s. 802.11g is also based on 
multimedia applications. Therefore, modification OFDM but uses the 2.4 GHz ISM band and was 
of existing 802.11 standards is necessary. formally ratified by the IEEE Standards AssociaAlthough IEEE 802.11e is being proposed as the tion’s Standard Board in June 2003. This stanupcoming standard for the enhancement of ser- dard specifies a maximum transmission rate of 
vice differentiation, QoS guarantee in 802.11 is 54 Mb/s, the same as 802.11a. However, since 
still a very challenging problem and needs fur- 802.11g uses the same spectrum between 2.4 and 
2.4835 GHz and is inherently backward compatiIEEE Wireless Communications • August 2004 
1536-1284/04/$20.00 © 2004 IEEE 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Consortium - Algeria (CERIST). Downloaded on June 17,2022 at 22:12:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.  
Task Group Responsibility 
802.11a — OFDM in 5 GHz Band Specification enabling up to 54 Mb/s to be achieved in the 5 GHz unlicensed radio band 
by utilizing OFDM. 
802.11b — HR/DSSS in 2.4 GHz Band Specification enabling up to 22 Mb/s to be achieved in the 2.4 GHz unlicensed radio 
band by utilizing HR/DSSS. 
802.11c — Bridge Operation Procedures Provides required information to ensure proper bridge operations, which is required 
when developing access points. 
802.11d — Global Harmonization Covers additional regulatory domains, which is especially important for operation in the 
5 GHz bands because the use of these frequencies differ widely from one country to 
another. As with 802.11c, the 802.11d standard mostly applies to companies developing  
802.11 products. 
802.11e — MAC Enhancements for QoS Covers issues of MAC enhancements for quality of service, such as EDCF service 
differentiation and hybrid coordination function (HCF). 
802.11f — Inter Access Point Protocol (IAPP) Provides interoperability for users roaming from one access point to another of dif 
vendor. 
802.11g —OFDM in 2.4 GHz band Specification enabling high data rates (36 or 54 Mb/s) to be achieved in the 2.4 GHz 
unlicensed radio band. 
802.11h — Dynamic Frequency Selection (DFS) Dynamic channel selection and transmission power control. 
802.11i – Security Specification for WLAN security to replace the weak Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP). 
Table 1. The family of IEEE 802.11 standards (OFDM: orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing). 
ble with 802.11b, it may attract more attention that suffers from location-dependent errors. 
from industry than the earlier standardized Therefore, PCF has not drawn much attention 
802.11a. Nevertheless, 802.11a possesses one from either the research community or industry, 
noteworthy advantage: the unlicensed radio and most existing schemes focus on the enhancespectrum (5.15–5.35 and 5.725–5.825 GHz) it ment of DCF, which is a fully distributed protooperates within is rarely used, while the 2.4 GHz col. 
spectrum for 802.11b and g has already been DCF is based on carrier sense multiple access 
taken by many home electronic devices such as with collision avoidance (CSMA/CA) instead of 
cordless phones, microwave ovens, and garage CSMA with collision detection (CSMA/CD) 
door openers. The family of IEEE 802.11 stan- because stations cannot listen to the channel for 
dards is shown in Table 1. collision while transmitting. In IEEE 802.11, carThe 802.11 MAC supports two basic medium rier sensing (CS) is performed at both PHY and 
access protocols: contention-based distributed MAC layers: physical CS and MAC layer virtual 
coordination function (DCF) and optional point CS. If the MAC frame length (including the paycoordination function (PCF). When PCF is load and 34 bytes of MAC header) exceeds the 
enabled, the wireless channel is divided into RTS_threshold 
superframes. Each superframe consists of a con- to-send (CTS) are used by stations to solve the 
tention-free period (CFP) for PCF and a con- hidden terminal and capture effect problems. A 
tention period (CP) for DCF. At the beginning MAC protocol data unit (MPDU) contains headof CFP, the point coordinator (usually the access er information, payload, and a 32-bit cyclic 
point, AP) contends for access to the wireless redundancy check (CRC). The duration field 
channel. Once it acquires the channel, it cyclical- indicates the amount of time after the end of the 
ly polls high-priority stations and grants them present frame the channel will be used to comthe privilege of transmitting. Although the plete successful transmission of the data or manoptional PCF is designed for delay-bounded ser- agement frame. Stations use the information in 
vices, it is centralized and can only be used in the duration field to adjust their network allocathe network of infrastructure mode. In addition, tion vector (NAV), which indicates the amount 
the loose specification of PCF leaves many issues of time that must elapse until the current transunsolved [3]: mission session is complete and the channel can 
• PCF experiences substantial delay at low load; be sensed again for idle status. 
stations must always wait for polling, even in Before a station sends out a data frame, it 
an otherwise idle system; senses the channel. If the channel is idle for at 
• Since the AP needs to contend for the chan- least a DCF interframe space (DIFS), the frame 
nel using DCF at the beginning of a CFP, the is transmitted. Otherwise, a backoff time slot is 
effective period of contention-free polling may chosen randomly in the interval [0, 
vary. contention window (CW) is incremented expo• It is very difficult for the point coordinator to nentially with an increasing number of attempts 
manage the polling of a large number of inter- to retransmit the frame. Upon receipt of a coractive streams without harming the applica- rect packet, the receiving stations waits a short 
tions using DCF contention. interframe space (SIFS) interval and transmits a 
In addition, PCF is a centralized approach positive acknowledgment frame (ACK) back to 
IEEE Wireless Communications • August 2004 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Consortium - Algeria (CERIST). Downloaded on June 17,2022 at 22:12:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
null 
Specification enabling up to 54 Mb/s to be achieved in the 5 GHz unlicensed radio band 
Specification enabling up to 22 Mb/s to be achieved in the 2.4 GHz unlicensed radio 
band by utilizing HR/DSSS. 
Provides required information to ensure proper bridge operations, which is required 
when developing access points. 
Covers additional regulatory domains, which is especially important for operation in the 
5 GHz bands because the use of these frequencies differ widely from one country to 
another. As with 802.11c, the 802.11d standard mostly applies to companies developing  
Covers issues of MAC enhancements for quality of service, such as EDCF service 
differentiation and hybrid coordination function (HCF). 
Provides interoperability for users roaming from one access point to another of different 
Specification enabling high data rates (36 or 54 Mb/s) to be achieved in the 2.4 GHz 
unlicensed radio band. 
Dynamic channel selection and transmission power control. 
Specification for WLAN security to replace the weak Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP). 
The family of IEEE 802.11 standards (OFDM: orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing). 
that suffers from location-dependent errors. 
Therefore, PCF has not drawn much attention 
from either the research community or industry, 
and most existing schemes focus on the enhancement of DCF, which is a fully distributed protoDCF is based on carrier sense multiple access 
with collision avoidance (CSMA/CA) instead of 
CSMA with collision detection (CSMA/CD) 
because stations cannot listen to the channel for 
collision while transmitting. In IEEE 802.11, carrier sensing (CS) is performed at both PHY and 
MAC layers: physical CS and MAC layer virtual 
CS. If the MAC frame length (including the payload and 34 bytes of MAC header) exceeds the 
RTS_threshold, request-to-send (RTS) and clearto-send (CTS) are used by stations to solve the 
hidden terminal and capture effect problems. A 
MAC protocol data unit (MPDU) contains header information, payload, and a 32-bit cyclic 
redundancy check (CRC). The duration field 
indicates the amount of time after the end of the 
present frame the channel will be used to complete successful transmission of the data or management frame. Stations use the information in 
the duration field to adjust their network allocation vector (NAV), which indicates the amount 
of time that must elapse until the current transmission session is complete and the channel can 
be sensed again for idle status. 
Before a station sends out a data frame, it 
senses the channel. If the channel is idle for at 
least a DCF interframe space (DIFS), the frame 
is transmitted. Otherwise, a backoff time slot is 
chosen randomly in the interval [0,CW). The 
contention window (CW) is incremented exponentially with an increasing number of attempts 
to retransmit the frame. Upon receipt of a correct packet, the receiving stations waits a short 
interframe space (SIFS) interval and transmits a 
positive acknowledgment frame (ACK) back to 
7 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Consortium - Algeria (CERIST). Downloaded on June 17,2022 at 22:12:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.  
DIFS SIFS SIFS 
RTS DataFrag0 DataFrag1 
Source 
SIFS SIFS SIFS 
CTS ACK0 ACK1 
Destination 
DIFS 
NAV (RTS) 
Other NAV (CTS) 
NAV (DataFrag0) 
NAV (ACK0) 
Backoff 
Defer access 
Figure 1. The CSMA/CA-RTS/CT with fragmentation access scheme. 
the source station, indicating transmission success. During the backoff period, the backoff 
timer is decremented in terms of slot time as 
long as the channel is determined to be idle. 
When the backoff timer reaches zero, the data 
frame is sent out. If collision occurs, a new backoff time slot is chosen and the backoff procedure 
starts over until some time limit is exceeded. 
After successful transmission, the CW is reset to 
CW . For further increase of wireless channel 
min 
utilization, payload length is divided into fragments of smaller size (if it exceeds the 
Frag_threshold) before a packet is transmitted 
within one CW. The advantage of this technique 
is that if an error occurs during its transmission 
of a specific fragment, a station does not have to 
wait to back off until the whole payload is transmitted. Also, it does not have to retransmit previous fragments that have been transmitted 
successfully. The timing diagram of  CSMA/CARTS/CTS with fragmentation access is shown in 
Fig. 1. The range of RTS_threshold 
bytes (default), while the range of Frag_threshold 
is 256–2312 bytes (default). However, vendors 
may choose different ranges for both thresholds. 
Once an error occurs, a packet has to be 
retransmitted by the attempting station. Errors 
may be caused by many possible situations. For 
example, the corresponding CTS frame may not 
be returned after an RTS frame is transmitted. 
This may occur due to: 
Parameter Meaning and units Tuning effect 
If increased 
Beacon interval Number of Tus between Better throughput and longer 
transmission of beacon frames battery life 
RTS threshold Frames longer than the threshold use I 
RTS/CTS access method theoretical throughput if no 
hidden terminal or interference 
Fragmentation threshold Frames longer than the threshold I 
are fragmented free channel 
Long/short retry limits The maximum number of Lower frames drop rate, but it 
retransmission allowed for frames may incur longer backoff and 
shorter/longer than RTS threshold throttle the throughput 
Table 2. Common tunable parameters in 802.11. 
8 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Consortium - Algeria (CERIST). Downloaded on June 17,2022 at 22:12:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
nullnull 
• Collision with the transmission of another station 
• Interference in the channel during the transmission of other RTS/CTS frames 
• The station receiving the RTS frame having 
an active virtual CS condition (indicating a 
busy medium time period) 
Two retry counters, the short retry count and 
long retry count, are defined for use in packet 
CW 
retransmission. Packets shorter than RTS_threshold are associated with the short retry count; 
others are associated with the long retry count. 
The retry counters begin at 0 and are incrementBackoff 
ed whenever a frame (or fragment) transmission 
starts 
fails. A frame is dropped if the retry count 
exceeds the maximum retry limit. The short 
The CSMA/CA-RTS/CT with fragmentation access scheme. 
count is reset to 0 when: 
• A CTS is received in response to a transmitted RTS. 
the source station, indicating transmission suc- • An ACK is received after a non-fragmented 
cess. During the backoff period, the backoff transmission. 
timer is decremented in terms of slot time as • A broadcast or multicast frame is received. 
long as the channel is determined to be idle. The long retry count is reset to 0 when: 
When the backoff timer reaches zero, the data • An ACK is received for a frame longer than 
frame is sent out. If collision occurs, a new back- RTS threshold. 
off time slot is chosen and the backoff procedure • A broadcast or multicast frame is received. 
starts over until some time limit is exceeded. In order to optimize the performance of 
After successful transmission, the CW is reset to DCF, a number of parameters [4] are tunable in 
. For further increase of wireless channel both the PHY and MAC layers of 802.11. A few 
utilization, payload length is divided into frag- are selected and shown in Table 2. However, 
ments of smaller size (if it exceeds the these parameters are basically station-based and 
) before a packet is transmitted therefore cannot effectively differentiate multiwithin one CW. The advantage of this technique ple flows within a station. Furthermore, the 
is that if an error occurs during its transmission effects of tuning these parameters are limited in 
of a specific fragment, a station does not have to terms of increasing/decreasing MAC throughwait to back off until the whole payload is trans- put/delay, respectively. Therefore, additional 
mitted. Also, it does not have to retransmit pre- resolutions are demanded to guarantee QoS in 
vious fragments that have been transmitted 802.11. 
successfully. The timing diagram of  CSMA/CARTS/CTS with fragmentation access is shown in 
QOS MECHANISMS 
RTS_threshold is 0–2347 
Frag_threshold Most existing QoS mechanisms for 802.11 can be 
is 256–2312 bytes (default). However, vendors classified into three categories: 
may choose different ranges for both thresholds. • Service differentiation 
Once an error occurs, a packet has to be • Admission control and bandwidth reservation 
retransmitted by the attempting station. Errors • Link adaptation 
may be caused by many possible situations. For While discussing different QoS schemes, we do 
example, the corresponding CTS frame may not not consider those based on higher layers since 
be returned after an RTS frame is transmitted. 802.11 specifies access technologies at the MAC 
and PHY layers. 
Tuning effect 
If increased If decreased 
Better throughput and longer Mobile stations can move faster 
battery life and still maintain the network 
connectivity 
Increasing the maximum Higher throughput if there are a 
theoretical throughput if no large number of hidden terminals 
hidden terminal or interference 
Increasing throughout in error- Increasing throughput in errorfree channel prone channel 
Lower frames drop rate, but it Higher frames drop rate, but 
may incur longer backoff and smaller buffer required 
throttle the throughput 
IEEE Wireless Communications • August 2004 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Consortium - Algeria (CERIST). Downloaded on June 17,2022 at 22:12:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.  
802.11 DCF 
Priority-based 
Methodology 
Contention window 
Object 
Backoff algorithm 
CW /CW 
min max 
DWFQ (Distributed 
P-DCF (Persistent 
Mechanism EDCF (802.11e) 
Weighted Fair Queue) 
Factor DCF) 
Figure 2. IEEE 802.11 service differentiation mechanisms. 
based on the difference between the actual and 
BETTER THAN BEST EFFORT SCHEMES: 
expected throughputs. If the actual throughput is 
SERVICE DIFFERENTIATION (MAC) 
lower than the expected throughput,  
Research has been done to provide certain decreased in order to increase the flow’s priority, 
DCF-based QoS enhancements that mainly and vice versa. In the second algorithm, a ratio 
address effective support of service differentia- (L ′ = R /W 
i i 
tion. In fact, these mechanisms do not provide throughput and  
any QoS guarantee, only better than best effort the ith station. By comparing its own  
services. Figure 2 shows a hierarchical taxono- those of others, a station can adjust its  
my of QoS mechanisms that enable service dif- example, if its  
ferentiation in 802.11. Basically, service it will decrease its  
differentiation is achieved by two main meth- Distributed Fair Scheduling (DFS) [8, 10] 
ods: priority and fair scheduling [5]. While the The main idea of DFS is to differentiate the 
former binds channel access to different traffic backoff interval (BI) based on the packet length 
classes by prioritized contention parameters, and traffic class, and the station with smaller BI 
the latter partitions the channel bandwidth fair- transmits first. For the  
ly by regulating wait times of traffic classes in ing × factor 
proportion according to given weights. The tun- interval, L 
i 
able parameters (or object in Fig. 2) for both (the weights of high throughput classes are 
approaches are CW size, backoff algorithm, and larger than that of low classes), and  
interframe space. dom variable uniformly distributed in [0.9,1.1]. 
The specific service differentiation mecha- ρ is introduced to minimize the collision caused 
i 
nisms are: by multiple stations with the same backoff 
Enhanced DCF (EDCF) [6]: EDCF is a interval. 
main part of the upcoming 802.11e standard Distributed Deficit Round Robin (DDRR) 
for service differentiation. It prioritizes traffic [11]: In this algorithm, the  
categories by different contention parameters, at the jth station is assigned with a service 
including arbitrary interframe space (AIFS), quantum rate 
maximum and minimum backoff window size requires, and a deficit counter (DC 
(CW ), and a multiplication factor for accumulates at the rate of  
max/min 
expanding the backoff window. Although all by the packet length whenever a packet is 
traffic categories keep using the same DCF transmitted. DC 
access method, they have different probabili- frame space (IFS 
ties of winning the channel contention by dif- before transmission or backoff starts, dependferentiating contention parameters. EDCF ing on whether backoff is used. A larger DC 
allows any combinations of these contention results in a smaller IFS 
parameters according to the service provider’s the collision between stations with the same 
needs. deficit counter, randomization of IFS 
Persistent Factor DCF (P-DCF) [7]: In this further adopted if a backoff scheme is elimialgorithm, each traffic class is associated with a nated. 
persistent factor P (high-priority classes have Potentially, fair-scheduling-based schemes are 
smaller P). In a backoff stage, a uniformly dis- advantageous to fairly allocate bandwidth among 
tributed random number r is generated in every traffic classes and prevent starvation of a specific 
slot time. Each flow stops the backoff and starts class. However, they often require substantial 
transmission only if (r > P) in the current slot modification of existing 802.11 standards. Comtime, given no transmission occurs in previous pared to fair-scheduling-based schemes, priorityslot times. Therefore, the backoff interval is a based mechanisms require less modifications of 
geometrically distributed random variable with the existing DCF access method and provide 
parameter P. better QoS support for real-time applications. 
Distributed Weighted Fair Queue (DWFQ) With the imperative demand to transmit video/ 
[8, 9]: Two different algorithms using this strate- voice data over WLANs, IEEE 802.11e has 
gy have been proposed. In the first, the backoff gained the interest of the majority of the comwindow size CW of any traffic flow is adjusted munity. 
IEEE Wireless Communications • August 2004 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Consortium - Algeria (CERIST). Downloaded on June 17,2022 at 22:12:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
null 
Research has been 
done to provide certain 
DCF-based QoS 
Fair-scheduling-based 
enhancements, which 
Interframe space AIFS 
mainly address the 
effective support of 
DFS (Distributed DDRR (Distributed 
Fair Scheduling) Deficit Round-Robin) 
service differentiation. 
In fact, these 
mechanisms do not 
based on the difference between the actual and 
expected throughputs. If the actual throughput is 
provide any QoS 
lower than the expected throughput, CW will be 
decreased in order to increase the flow’s priority, 
guarantee, but only 
and vice versa. In the second algorithm, a ratio 
W ) is calculated, where R is the actual 
i i 
better than 
throughput and W the corresponding weight of 
i 
th station. By comparing its own L with 
i 
best-effort services. 
those of others, a station can adjust its CW; for 
example, if its L is smaller than those of others, 
i 
it will decrease its CW. 
Distributed Fair Scheduling (DFS) [8, 10]: 
The main idea of DFS is to differentiate the 
backoff interval (BI) based on the packet length 
and traffic class, and the station with smaller BI 
transmits first. For the ith flow, BI = ρ × scali i 
factor × L /ϕ , where BI is the backoff 
i i i 
is the packet length, ϕ is the weight 
i i 
(the weights of high throughput classes are 
larger than that of low classes), and ρ is a rani 
dom variable uniformly distributed in [0.9,1.1]. 
is introduced to minimize the collision caused 
by multiple stations with the same backoff 
Distributed Deficit Round Robin (DDRR) 
: In this algorithm, the ith throughput class 
th station is assigned with a service 
quantum rate (Q ) equal to the throughput it 
i,j 
requires, and a deficit counter (DC ) that 
i,j 
accumulates at the rate of Q and is decreased 
i,j 
by the packet length whenever a packet is 
transmitted. DC is used to calculate the interi,j 
frame space (IFS ), which is the wait time 
i,j 
before transmission or backoff starts, depending on whether backoff is used. A larger DC 
i,j 
results in a smaller IFS . In order to minimize 
i,j 
the collision between stations with the same 
deficit counter, randomization of IFS will be 
i,j 
further adopted if a backoff scheme is elimiPotentially, fair-scheduling-based schemes are 
advantageous to fairly allocate bandwidth among 
traffic classes and prevent starvation of a specific 
class. However, they often require substantial 
modification of existing 802.11 standards. Compared to fair-scheduling-based schemes, prioritybased mechanisms require less modifications of 
the existing DCF access method and provide 
better QoS support for real-time applications. 
With the imperative demand to transmit video/ 
voice data over WLANs, IEEE 802.11e has 
gained the interest of the majority of the com9 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Consortium - Algeria (CERIST). Downloaded on June 17,2022 at 22:12:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.  
The AACA protocol was 
Admission control 
designed to effectively 
Measurement-based 
solve the hidden 
terminal and exposed 
Data 
Virtual Probe Permissible 
probe 
MAC packet throughout 
packet 
terminal problems in 
-Barry -Valaee -Kazantzidis 
-Shah 
et al. and Li 
et al. 
multi-hop networks. 
Figure 3. Admission control and bandwidth reservation mechanisms. 
Nevertheless, it can also 
be used to achieve 
QOS MECHANISMS FOR ADMISSION CONTROL 
bandwidth reservation. 
BANDWIDTH RESERVATION (MAC) 
Service differentiation is helpful in providing 
better QoS for multimedia data traffic under low 
to medium traffic load conditions. However, due 
to the inefficiency of IEEE 802.11 MAC, service 
differentiation does not perform well under high 
traffic load conditions [3]. In this case, admission 
control and bandwidth reservation become necessary in order to guarantee QoS of existing traffic. Otherwise, the extremely large saturation 
delay may lead to failure to support multimedia 
applications. However, unlike wired networks, in 
IEEE 802.11 wireless networks, a wireless node 
has no knowledge of the exact condition of the 
network and thus cannot make an accurate decision on whether or not to admit a new flow. In 
addition, with the contention-based CSMA/CA 
channel access mechanism, bandwidth provisioning is almost impossible, leading to only soft 
QoS guarantee. Because of these two major differences, admission control and bandwidth reservation in an IEEE 802.11 wireless network is 
quite difficult. Figure 3 shows a hierarchical taxonomy of QoS mechanisms that enable admission control and bandwidth reservation in 802.11. 
In general, admission control schemes require 
less modification to the 802.11 standards than 
bandwidth reservation schemes. Basically, admission control schemes can be broadly classified 
into measurement-based and calculation-based 
methods. In measurement-based schemes, admission control decisions are made based on the 
measurements of existing network status, such as 
throughput and delay. On the other hand, calculation-based schemes construct certain performance metrics or criteria for evaluating the 
status of the network [12]. 
Measurement-based approaches 
MAC [13]: Barry et al. propose a virtual MAC 
algorithm that passively monitors the channel by 
virtual MAC frames and estimates local service 
level (i.e., throughput and delay) by the measurement of virtual frames. In addition, a virtual 
source (VS) algorithm allows application parameters to be tuned according to dynamic channel 
conditions by utilizing virtual MAC. Valaee and 
Li [14] proposed a measurement-based admission procedure using a sequence of probe packets for ad hoc networks. Instead of using probe 
packets, Shah et al. [15] proposed a measurement-based admission control scheme using data 
packets to measure the network load. 
Calculation-based approaches: Kazantzidis  
10 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Consortium - Algeria (CERIST). Downloaded on June 17,2022 at 22:12:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
null 
Admission control Bandwidth reservation 
Calculation-based Scheduling and reservation-based 
Flow 
reservation and 
Permissible 
Saturation- ARME AACA 
priority 
throughout 
based -Banchs and -Liu 
allocation 
-Kazantzidis 
-Zhu et al. Perez et al. 
-Li and  
et al. 
Prabhakaran 
Admission control and bandwidth reservation mechanisms. 
al. [16] present a heuristic solution using a simONTROL AND 
ple parameter, permissible throughput, as the 
(MAC) 
admission decision criterion. Implementation 
Service differentiation is helpful in providing issues in multihop ad hoc networks, such as 
better QoS for multimedia data traffic under low propagation of permissible throughput using the 
to medium traffic load conditions. However, due Ad Hoc On Demand Distance Vector (AODV) 
to the inefficiency of IEEE 802.11 MAC, service routing protocol and discovering the bottleneck 
differentiation does not perform well under high along the path, have been investigated. Based on 
traffic load conditions [3]. In this case, admission the proposed saturation coefficient, Zhu et al. 
control and bandwidth reservation become nec- [10] offer a calculation-based distributed admisessary in order to guarantee QoS of existing traf- sion control protocol. Here, stations can effecfic. Otherwise, the extremely large saturation tively determine whether they are approaching 
delay may lead to failure to support multimedia saturation condition based on piggybacked inforapplications. However, unlike wired networks, in mation, including the number of active stations, 
IEEE 802.11 wireless networks, a wireless node their corresponding traffic bit rates, and average 
has no knowledge of the exact condition of the packet lengths. In this protocol the admission 
network and thus cannot make an accurate deci- control decisions are made dynamically at both 
sion on whether or not to admit a new flow. In source and destination stations in a fully disaddition, with the contention-based CSMA/CA tributed way. It can predict saturation and prechannel access mechanism, bandwidth provision- vent it from happening. 
ing is almost impossible, leading to only soft Scheduling and reservation-based approachQoS guarantee. Because of these two major dif- es: Li and Prabhakaran [1] introduce a novel 
ferences, admission control and bandwidth reser- framework for admission control with priority 
vation in an IEEE 802.11 wireless network is reservation and allocation, which is mainly 
quite difficult. Figure 3 shows a hierarchical tax- focused on optimizing the usage of priority 
onomy of QoS mechanisms that enable admis- resources. Banchs and Pérez [8] present ARME 
sion control and bandwidth reservation in 802.11. as an extension of DCF. ARME uses a tokenIn general, admission control schemes require bucket-based algorithm to detect whether the 
less modification to the 802.11 standards than network is in overloading condition, and improve 
bandwidth reservation schemes. Basically, admis- the performance of the system by adjusting the 
sion control schemes can be broadly classified CW appropriately. Liu et al. [17] define a class 
into measurement-based and calculation-based of reservation-based MAC access protocols with 
methods. In measurement-based schemes, admis- multichannel supports, including AACA-SDT, 
sion control decisions are made based on the ACA-MDT, and AACA-RDT. The AACA 
measurements of existing network status, such as adopted the RTS/CTS access method on a comthroughput and delay. On the other hand, calcu- mon channel solely for reservation purposes. 
lation-based schemes construct certain perfor- After successful reservation, the station pair 
mance metrics or criteria for evaluating the transmits packets uninterruptedly in the reserved 
channel. The AACA protocol was designed to 
Measurement-based approaches: Virtual effectively solve the hidden terminal and exposed 
propose a virtual MAC terminal problems in multihop networks. Neveralgorithm that passively monitors the channel by theless, it can also be used to achieve bandwidth 
virtual MAC frames and estimates local service reservation. 
level (i.e., throughput and delay) by the meaQOS MECHANISM FOR LINK ADAPTATION (PHY) 
surement of virtual frames. In addition, a virtual 
source (VS) algorithm allows application param- 802.11 specifies multiple transmission rates that 
eters to be tuned according to dynamic channel are achieved by different modulation techniques 
conditions by utilizing virtual MAC. Valaee and in the PLCP header of the PHY layer. However, 
Li [14] proposed a measurement-based admis- it intentionally leaves the rate adaptation and 
sion procedure using a sequence of probe pack- signaling mechanisms open. Since transmission 
ets for ad hoc networks. Instead of using probe rates differ with the channel conditions, an 
[15] proposed a measure- appropriate link adaptation mechanism is desirment-based admission control scheme using data able to maximize the throughput under dynamically changing channel conditions. Figure 4 
: Kazantzidis et shows a hierarchical taxonomy of QoS mechaIEEE Wireless Communications • August 2004 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Consortium - Algeria (CERIST). Downloaded on June 17,2022 at 22:12:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.  
Link adaptation 
Methodology PLCP-based 
Payload Frame retry 
SNR/CIR/power level 
Metric length count 
Received 
PERsignal strength 
MPDU-based 
Mechanism prediction 
-Pavon and 
-Qiao et al. 
-Lampe et al. 
Choi 
Figure 4. Link adaptation mechanisms. 
nisms that enable link adaptation. Most link bit error rate (BER) channel conditions. Howevadaptation mechanisms focus on algorithms to er, due to the additional signaling overhead of 
switch among transmission rates specified in the proposed scheme, the throughput under low 
PLCP, without the need to modify existing stan- BER channel conditions is lower than the standards. However, there is a novel idea to adjust dard 802.11b. 
the length of DSSS pseudo-noise (PN) code in 
802.11b, with slight modifications of 802.11b 
C 
HALLENGES 
DCF. Metrics used in existing link adaptation 
algorithms include channel signal-to-noise W 
IRELESS 
ratio/carrier-to-interference ratio (SNR/CIR), 
received power level, average payload length, IEEE 802.11 WLANs have been successfully 
transmission acknowledgments, or combinations. applied as the last mile technology in the increasReceived signal strength (RSS) [18]: Pavon ingly pervasive computing environments where 
and Choi choose the RSS as the metric for the wireless/mobile users accesses Internet services 
adaptation algorithm with the assumption that via the access point (AP). With more and more 
transmission power is fixed. The authors also real-time multimedia applications subscribed to 
assume a linear relationship between the average by mobile users, there is an urgent demand for 
RSS and SNR. A rate adaptation algorithm at end-to-end QoS guarantee to be provided in 
every station maintains its own 12 RSS thresh- wired-cum-wireless heterogeneous networks. 
olds and corresponding transmission rates. Based The architecture of a heterogeneous wired-cumon the measured RSS, the station dynamically wireless network is depicted in Fig. 5 (revised 
switches to an appropriate transmission rate. from the MIRAI architecture [23]). Currently, 
PER-prediction [19]: Lampe et al. propose a there are some noteworthy approaches that 
link adaptation scheme in which decisions are focus on the interoperability between IEEE 
made based on packet error rate (PER) predic- 802.11 and differentiated services (DiffServ) or 
tion. A main contribution of this article is the integrated services (IntServ). These approaches 
prediction of PER with not only SNR/CIR but explore the possibility of protocol interoperabilialso the momentary channel transfer function. ty at the AP. Since MAC protocols are prevalent 
MPDU-based link adaptation [20]: Observ- in IEEE 802.11 WLAN, cross-layer interaction is 
ing the effects of multiple factors on the through- necessary for both network and MAC layers to 
put, Qiao et al. proposed to use a combination share the flow QoS characteristics and network 
of SNR, average payload length, and frame retry topology information without duplicative efforts. 
count as the metric for the link adaptation algo- 802.11e and DiffServ 
rithm. The proposed algorithm pre-established a pose a collaborative end-to-end QoS architectable of best transmission rate for decision mak- ture across wired WAN, wired LAN, and 
ing. WLAN, based on DiffServ, IEEE 802.1D/Q, and 
Link adaptation with success/fail (S/F) IEEE 802.11e, respectively. The 802.3 MAC 
thresholds [21]: Chevillat et al. use the ACKs of frames carry the user priority values via the 
transmitted frames as a measurement of channel 802.1Q virtual LAN (VLAN) tag. These user 
condition. The basic idea of this algorithm is: if priorities are forwarded through 802.1D MAC 
the number of consecutive successful transmis- bridge to 802.1e MAC and used by EDCF to difsions exceeds S, the transmission rate is ferentiate flows. To realize this, it is necessary to 
increased. On the other hand, if the number of establish mapping between DiffServ code point 
consecutive failed transmission exceeds F, the (DSCP) values, defined in the DiffServ (DS) 
transmission rate is decreased. The ACKs of field, and traffic category identification (TCID), 
frames are used to indicate whether a transmis- defined in 802.1e. Two kinds of mapping have 
sion succeeded or failed. been defined in [24]: direct and hierarchical. In 
Code Adapts To Enhance Reliability direct mapping, when the IP packets are encap(CATER) [22]: Mullins et al. describe an adap- sulated in MAC frames, they are placed in priortive PN code algorithm for direct sequence ity queues without preemption. In hierarchical 
spread spectrum (DSSS) used in 802.11b. This mapping, IP packets are classified and shaped 
algorithm improved the throughput under high according to the priority of the DSCP values 
IEEE Wireless Communications • August 2004 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Consortium - Algeria (CERIST). Downloaded on June 17,2022 at 22:12:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
null 
With more and more 
Link adaptation 
real-time multimedia 
applications subscribed 
FEC 
by mobile users, there is 
Frame retry 
Transmission ACKs 
an urgent demand that 
end-to-end QoS 
S/F (success/ CATER 
fail) thresholds -Mullin guarantee should be 
-Cheville et al. et al. 
provided in 
wired-cum-wireless 
bit error rate (BER) channel conditions. Howevheterogeneous 
er, due to the additional signaling overhead of 
the proposed scheme, the throughput under low 
networks.  
BER channel conditions is lower than the standard 802.11b. 
HALLENGES AND FUTURE WORK 
IRELESS INTERNET AND INTEROPERABILITY 
IEEE 802.11 WLANs have been successfully 
applied as the last mile technology in the increasingly pervasive computing environments where 
wireless/mobile users accesses Internet services 
via the access point (AP). With more and more 
real-time multimedia applications subscribed to 
by mobile users, there is an urgent demand for 
end-to-end QoS guarantee to be provided in 
wired-cum-wireless heterogeneous networks. 
The architecture of a heterogeneous wired-cumwireless network is depicted in Fig. 5 (revised 
from the MIRAI architecture [23]). Currently, 
there are some noteworthy approaches that 
focus on the interoperability between IEEE 
802.11 and differentiated services (DiffServ) or 
integrated services (IntServ). These approaches 
explore the possibility of protocol interoperability at the AP. Since MAC protocols are prevalent 
in IEEE 802.11 WLAN, cross-layer interaction is 
necessary for both network and MAC layers to 
share the flow QoS characteristics and network 
topology information without duplicative efforts. 
802.11e and DiffServ: Park and Kim [24] propose a collaborative end-to-end QoS architecture across wired WAN, wired LAN, and 
WLAN, based on DiffServ, IEEE 802.1D/Q, and 
IEEE 802.11e, respectively. The 802.3 MAC 
frames carry the user priority values via the 
802.1Q virtual LAN (VLAN) tag. These user 
priorities are forwarded through 802.1D MAC 
bridge to 802.1e MAC and used by EDCF to differentiate flows. To realize this, it is necessary to 
establish mapping between DiffServ code point 
(DSCP) values, defined in the DiffServ (DS) 
field, and traffic category identification (TCID), 
defined in 802.1e. Two kinds of mapping have 
been defined in [24]: direct and hierarchical. In 
direct mapping, when the IP packets are encapsulated in MAC frames, they are placed in priority queues without preemption. In hierarchical 
mapping, IP packets are classified and shaped 
according to the priority of the DSCP values 
11 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Consortium - Algeria (CERIST). Downloaded on June 17,2022 at 22:12:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.  
Internet 
Infrastructure 
Gateway router 
Access point 
Wireless LAN 
Figure 5. Architecture of the wireless Internet. 
before being forwarded to 802.1e priority 
queues. Essentially, hierarchical mapping enables 
more accurate end-to-end QoS traffic control 
required by user applications. 
802.11 and IntServ: Based on a proposed 
MAC layer flow reservation and admission control protocol in IEEE 802.11 WLAN, called 
WRESV, Li and Zhu [25] suggest integrating 
RSVP and WRESV for the support of IntServ in 
heterogeneous wired-cum-wireless networks. In 
their approach, features of Resource Reservation Protocol (RSVP) and the characteristics of 
the wireless medium are carefully considered 
(e.g., multicast receivers in a WLAN can be handled by broadcasting at the AP). Message mappings at the AP are implemented by cross-layer 
interaction, and user priorities are mapped to 
802.11 MAC priorities with 802.1p. Since 
WRESV can work with most of the existing 
MAC schedulers such as DCF, EDCF, and DFS, 
this integration scheme is more general and 
leaves space for further enhancement. One 
interesting feature is that this integration scheme 
also considers support of both node mobility and 
QoS in the situation of handoff. 
SUPPORT OF FULL MOBILITY 
802.11 supports mobile stations (MSs) within an 
802.11 extended service set (ESS) to roam 
among multiple APs. This roaming capability is 
achieved through MSs’ beacon scanning in a 
channel sweep. When an MS enters a new basic 
service area, it first scans across all channels, 
remaining on each channel for a specified period 
of time to detect the signal radiated from the 
AP, and then acquires the channels from the 
AP. 
Currently, 802.11 WLAN service is only available for low-mobility devices in isolated hot 
spots with coverage from dozens of meters up to 
a few hundred meters. However, recent efforts 
have been made to extend 802.11 WLANs into 
outdoor cellular networks to provide fully 
mobile broadband service with ubiquitous coverage and high-speed connectivity. Leung  
[26] investigate the throughput of 802.11 MAC 
12 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Consortium - Algeria (CERIST). Downloaded on June 17,2022 at 22:12:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
null 
protocol with the service area (cell) size of 6 km 
and claim that without modifying the standard, 
the DCF access method with RTS/CTS is feasible for large outdoor cellular coverage. To 
Infrastructure 
extend the coverage of 802.11, smart antenna 
design at the radio link is critical. By transmitting packets in a beam instead of in all directions, Vivato Inc. extends the coverage of 802.11 
to kilometers, while other antennae (e.g., Cisco’s 
Aironet, Motorola Inc.’s Canopy Radio, and 
Proxim Inc.’s Tsunami QuickBridge) may reach 
up to 10 km. [27]. However, a cell with large 
outdoor coverage does not necessarily guarantee high-speed connectivity. Due to the unavoidable channel contention, throughput may 
degrade when a cell is overcrowded. Therefore, 
it is more desirable to have overlapped small 
cells with fast handoff mechanisms. So far, a few 
companies (e.g., MeshNetworks) have accomplished highway-speed connectivity through 
802.11 compatible protocols. In their implementation, data packets from the Internet are transmitted through APs hanging on rooftops or 
streetlights. 
before being forwarded to 802.1e priority 
queues. Essentially, hierarchical mapping enables 
QOS AND MOBILITY MANAGEMENT IN 
more accurate end-to-end QoS traffic control 
H 
YBRID WIRELESS NETWORKS 
: Based on a proposed In addition to roaming and horizontal handoff 
MAC layer flow reservation and admission con- among 802.11 WLANs, supporting QoS anytime, 
trol protocol in IEEE 802.11 WLAN, called anywhere, and by any media requires seamless 
WRESV, Li and Zhu [25] suggest integrating vertical handoffs between different wireless netRSVP and WRESV for the support of IntServ in works such as WLAN, mobile ad hoc network 
heterogeneous wired-cum-wireless networks. In (MANET) [28], Bluetooth, Universal Mobile 
their approach, features of Resource Reserva- Telecommunications System (UMTS), and widetion Protocol (RSVP) and the characteristics of band code-division multiple access (WCDMA). 
the wireless medium are carefully considered Many new architectures/schemes have been pro(e.g., multicast receivers in a WLAN can be han- posed recently for seamless integration of 
dled by broadcasting at the AP). Message map- WLAN and various wireless network interfaces, 
pings at the AP are implemented by cross-layer discussed below. 
interaction, and user priorities are mapped to Integration of WLAN and MANET: Lamont 
802.11 MAC priorities with 802.1p. Since and Wang [29] investigated the issue of mainWRESV can work with most of the existing taining session connectivity while mobiles continMAC schedulers such as DCF, EDCF, and DFS, uously roam across multiple WLANs and 
this integration scheme is more general and MANETs. In the proposed network architecture, 
leaves space for further enhancement. One routing within MANETs is handled by the Optiinteresting feature is that this integration scheme mized Link State Routing (OLSR) protocol, and 
also considers support of both node mobility and handoff between WLANs and MANETs is supported through automatic mode detection and 
node switching capabilities of the mobiles. To 
OBILITY 
achieve efficient mobility management, function802.11 supports mobile stations (MSs) within an alities of OLSR are extended to support Mobile 
802.11 extended service set (ESS) to roam IPv6. 
among multiple APs. This roaming capability is Integration of WLAN and Bluetooth: Conti 
achieved through MSs’ beacon scanning in a and Dardari [30] proposed an integrated analytichannel sweep. When an MS enters a new basic cal model for evaluation of the interference 
service area, it first scans across all channels, between IEEE 802.11 and Bluetooth. The model 
remaining on each channel for a specified period takes both PHY and MAC layers into account 
of time to detect the signal radiated from the and can easily be implemented. The perforAP, and then acquires the channels from the mance is evaluated by packet error probability in 
terms of the relative distances between the two 
Currently, 802.11 WLAN service is only avail- systems for different conditions. 
able for low-mobility devices in isolated hot Integration of WLAN and 3G wireless netspots with coverage from dozens of meters up to works: An architecture for integrating UMTS 
a few hundred meters. However, recent efforts and IEEE 802.11 WLANs was proposed by 
have been made to extend 802.11 WLANs into Jaseemuddin [31]. Since 802.11 is used primarily 
outdoor cellular networks to provide fully for high-speed best effort service, a mobile node 
mobile broadband service with ubiquitous cover- can maintain two connections in parallel (i.e., 
age and high-speed connectivity. Leung et al. data connection through WLAN and voice con[26] investigate the throughput of 802.11 MAC nection through UMTS). Park and Yoon [32] 
IEEE Wireless Communications • August 2004 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Consortium - Algeria (CERIST). Downloaded on June 17,2022 at 22:12:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.  
investigate vertical handoff between IEEE 802.11 • Support of full mobility in 802.11, which may 
WLANs and CDMA cellular networks. In their require the extension of coverage of 802.11 by 
handoff strategy, traffic characteristics are con- modifying the design of the smart antenna at 
sidered in order to guarantee low handoff laten- the radio link 
cy. Specifically, real-time traffic takes into • QoS and mobility management in hybrid 
account the handoff delay, and best effort traffic mobile/wireless networks where WLAN coextakes only throughput into account . Finally, ists with other networks such as MANET, 
Buddhikot and Chandranmenon [33] suggest Bluetooth, and 3G networks 
combining the features of wide-coverage low- These topics and issues combined extend the 
rate 3G networks and high-rate small-coverage concepts of QoS guarantee in 802.11 and make 
WLANs to improve the QoS and flexibility of it better suited for today’s high-speed highwireless data services. A loose integration mobility wireless networks. 
approach is realized with an IOTA gateway and 
a new client software in order to support seam[1] M. Li, B. Prabhakaran, and S. Sathyamurthy,  
less mobility, QoS guarantees, and multiprovider 
Reservation and Admission Control for Distributed 
roaming agreements. 
Scheduling Strategies in IEEE802.11 Wireless LAN, 
With the decreasing size of cells in next-genProc. 6th ACM Int’l. Wksp. Modeling, Anal. and Sim. 
eration multimedia-enabled wireless networks, 
Wireless and Mobile Sys. 
[2] IEEE 802.11, 1999 ed. (ISO/IEC 8802-11: 1999),  
the number of handoffs during a call’s lifetime 
Standards for Information Technology  
increases. Thus, for integration of WLAN and 
cations and Information Exchange between Systems 3/4-G wireless networks, an essential element of 
Local and Metropolitan Area Network  
seamless end-to-end QoS guarantee is ensuring 
Requirements  
Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications. 
low call dropping probability in the 3/4-G net[3] A. Lindgren, A. Almquist, and O. Schel 
works. Lou and Li [34] propose an adaptive 
of Quality of Service Schemes for IEEE 802.11 Wireless 
bandwidth allocation scheme, termed measureLANs,” Proc. 26th Annual IEEE Conf. Local Comp. Nets. 
ment-based preassignment, to prevent handoff 
Tampa, FL, Nov. 2001. 
[4] M. Gast,  
failure in wireless cellular networks. With periGuide, O’Reilly, 2002. 
odic measurement of traffic status within a local 
[5] W. Pattara-Atikom, P. Krishnamurthy, and S. Banerjee, 
cell, the number of channels reserved for a hand“Distributed Mechanisms for Quality of Service in Wireoff can be adjusted, thus eliminating the signalless LANs, 
pp. 26–34. 
ing overhead of status information exchange 
[6] IEEE Std 802.11e-D3.3,  
between involved cells. 
dard for Telecommunications and Information Exchange 
between Systems  
Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) 
S 
UMMARY 
and Physical Layer (PHY), 
[7] Y. Ge and J. Hou,  
Research in providing QoS guarantee in IEEE 
ferentiation in IEEE 802.11, 
802.11 WLANs and/or MANETs has been exten2003, pp. 1157 
sively studied in recent years, and many QoS 
[8] A. Banchs and X. P 
tees in IEEE 802.11 Wireless LAN, 
schemes have been proposed. We classify these 
1, 2002, pp. 130 
approaches into the following three categories: 
[9] A. Banchs and X. P 
• Link adaptation in the physical layer 
Queuing in 802.11 Wireless LAN, 
• Channel access coordination in the MAC layer 
Apr. 2002, pp. 3121 
[10] N. H. Vaidya, P. Bahl, and S. Gupta,  
• Admission control strategies in MAC and 
Scheduling in a Wireless LAN, 
higher layers 
2000, Aug. 2000, pp. 167 
Essentially, these approaches focus on differ[11] W. Pattara-Atikom, S. Banerjee, and P. Krishnamurthy, 
ent network layers and are tightly interrelated. 
“Starvation Prevention and Quality of Service in Wireless LANs, 
Without admission control and resource allocamedia Commun. 
tion, providing QoS guarantees only by differen[12] H. Zhu et al. 
tiating flows and coordinating the order of 
802.11 Ad Hoc Networks, 
channel access cannot be effective under high 
[13] M. Barry, A. T. Campell, and A. Veres,  
Control Algorithms for Service Differentiation in Wiretraffic loads. Also, all MAC and higher-layer 
less Packet Networks, 
protocols are significantly affected by link adap[14] S. Valaee and B. Li,  
tation mechanisms in the physical layer. Theretrol in Wireless Ad Hoc Networks, 
fore, the current trend is to design frameworks 
2002, Vancouver, BC, Canada, Sept. 24 
[15] S. H. Shah, K. Chen, and K. Nahrstedt,  
that can share flow characteristics across multiBandwidth Management for Single-Hop Ad Hoc Wireple layers and cooperate to meet applications’ 
less Networks, 
QoS requirements. 
Commun.. 2003. 
Besides the aforementioned QoS mecha[16] M. Kazantzidis, M. Gerla, and S.-J. Lee,  
Throughput Network Feedback for Adaptive Multimedia 
nisms, this article also discussed challenges 
in AODV MANETs, 
encountered in designing wireless Internet, mul1352–56. 
tihop ad hoc networks, and heterogeneous wire[17] K. Liu et al. 
less networks. We expect interesting work in the 
with Collision Avoidance for Wireless Multihop Ad Hoc 
Networks,” 
following areas: 
[18] J. D. P Pavon and S. Choi,  
• Interoperability between QoS mechanisms in 
IEEE 802.11 WLAN via Received Signal Strength Measure802.11 WLAN and existing QoS architectures 
ment,” IEEE ICC ’03 
for IP-based Internet, such as IntServ and 
[19] M. Lampe, H. Rohling, and J. Eichinger,  
tion for Link Adaptation in OFDM Systems, 
DiffServ 
Wksp., Hamburg, Germany, 2002. 
• QoS guarantee in a self-organized multihop 
[20] D. Qiao, S. Choi, and K. G. Shin,  
MANET, where link condition and resource 
Link Adaptation for IEEE 802.11a Wireless LANs, 
are highly dynamic 
Trans. Mobile Comp. 
IEEE Wireless Communications • August 2004 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Consortium - Algeria (CERIST). Downloaded on June 17,2022 at 22:12:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Support of full mobility in 802.11, which may 
So far, a few 
require the extension of coverage of 802.11 by 
modifying the design of the smart antenna at 
companies (e.g., 
the radio link 
oS and mobility management in hybrid 
MeshNetworks) have 
mobile/wireless networks where WLAN coexists with other networks such as MANET, 
accomplished highwayBluetooth, and 3G networks 
These topics and issues combined extend the 
speed connectivity 
concepts of QoS guarantee in 802.11 and make 
it better suited for today’s high-speed highthrough 802.11mobility wireless networks. 
compatible protocols. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Li, B. Prabhakaran, and S. Sathyamurthy, “On Flow 
In their implementation, 
Reservation and Admission Control for Distributed 
Scheduling Strategies in IEEE802.11 Wireless LAN,” 
Proc. 6th ACM Int’l. Wksp. Modeling, Anal. and Sim. data packets from the 
Wireless and Mobile Sys., Sept. 2003. 
[2] IEEE 802.11, 1999 ed. (ISO/IEC 8802-11: 1999), “IEEE 
Internet are transmitted 
Standards for Information Technology — Telecommunications and Information Exchange between Systems Local and Metropolitan Area Network — Specific through access points 
Requirements — Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access 
Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications.” 
hanging on rooftops 
[3] A. Lindgren, A. Almquist, and O. Schelén, “Evaluation 
of Quality of Service Schemes for IEEE 802.11 Wireless 
Proc. 26th Annual IEEE Conf. Local Comp. Nets., or streetlights. 
Tampa, FL, Nov. 2001. 
[4] M. Gast, 802.11 Wireless Networks: the Definitive 
Reilly, 2002. 
[5] W. Pattara-Atikom, P. Krishnamurthy, and S. Banerjee, 
Distributed Mechanisms for Quality of Service in Wireless LANs,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 10, June 2003, 
34. 
[6] IEEE Std 802.11e-D3.3, “Draft Supplement to IEEE Standard for Telecommunications and Information Exchange 
between Systems — LANMAN Specific Requirements,. 
Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) 
and Physical Layer (PHY),” Oct. 2002. 
[7] Y. Ge and J. Hou, “An Analytical Model for Service Differentiation in IEEE 802.11,” IEEE ICC ’03, vol. 2, May 
2003, pp. 1157–62. 
[8] A. Banchs and X. Pérez, “Providing Throughput Guarantees in IEEE 802.11 Wireless LAN,” IEEE WCNC ’02, vol. 
1, 2002, pp. 130–38. 
[9] A. Banchs and X. Pérez, “Distributed Weighted Fair 
Queuing in 802.11 Wireless LAN,” IEEE ICC ’02, vol. 5, 
Apr. 2002, pp. 3121–27. 
[10] N. H. Vaidya, P. Bahl, and S. Gupta, “Distributed Fair 
Scheduling in a Wireless LAN,” Proc. ACM MOBICOM 
, Aug. 2000, pp. 167–78. 
[11] W. Pattara-Atikom, S. Banerjee, and P. Krishnamurthy, 
Starvation Prevention and Quality of Service in Wireless LANs,” Proc. 5th Int’l. Symp. Wireless Pers. Multimedia Commun., HI, Oct. 2002. 
et al., “Distributed Admission Control for IEEE 
802.11 Ad Hoc Networks,” submitted, IEEE/ACM Trans. Net. 
[13] M. Barry, A. T. Campell, and A. Veres, “Distributed 
Control Algorithms for Service Differentiation in Wireless Packet Networks,” Proc. IEEE INFOCOM 2001. 
[14] S. Valaee and B. Li, “Distributed Call Admission Control in Wireless Ad Hoc Networks,” Proc. IEEE VTC 
, Vancouver, BC, Canada, Sept. 24–28, 2002. 
[15] S. H. Shah, K. Chen, and K. Nahrstedt, “Dynamic 
Bandwidth Management for Single-Hop Ad Hoc Wireless Networks,” Proc. IEEE Int’l. Conf. Perv. Comp. and 
Commun.. 2003. 
[16] M. Kazantzidis, M. Gerla, and S.-J. Lee, “Permissible 
Throughput Network Feedback for Adaptive Multimedia 
in AODV MANETs,” IEEE ICC ’01, vol. 5, June 2001, pp. 
et al., “A Reservation-based Multiple Access Protocol 
with Collision Avoidance for Wireless Multihop Ad Hoc 
” IEEE ICC ’03, vol. 2, May 2003, pp. 1119–23. 
[18] J. D. P Pavon and S. Choi, “Link Adaptation Strategy for 
IEEE 802.11 WLAN via Received Signal Strength MeasureIEEE ICC ’03, vol. 2, May 2003, pp. 1108–13. 
[19] M. Lampe, H. Rohling, and J. Eichinger, “PER-Prediction for Link Adaptation in OFDM Systems,” OFDM 
, Hamburg, Germany, 2002. 
[20] D. Qiao, S. Choi, and K. G. Shin, “Goodput Analysis and 
Link Adaptation for IEEE 802.11a Wireless LANs,” IEEE 
Trans. Mobile Comp., vol. 1, no. 4, 2002, pp. 278–92. 
13 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Consortium - Algeria (CERIST). Downloaded on June 17,2022 at 22:12:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.  
[21] P. Chevillat et al., “A Dynamic Link Adaptation AlgoAll MAC and higher-layer 
rithm for IEEE 802.11a Wireless LANs,”  
vol. 2, May 2003, pp. 1141–45. 
protocols are [22] B. E. Mullins, N. J. Davis IV, and S. F. Midkiff,  
Adaptive Wireless Local Area Network Protocol that 
Improves Throughput via Adaptive Control of Direct 
significantly affected 
Sequence Spectrum Parameters,” ACM SIGMOBILE 
Mobile Comp. and Commun. Rev., vol. 1, no. 3, Sept. 
by link adaptation 1997, pp. 9–20. 
[23] P. J. M. Havinga and G. Wu, “Wireless Internet on Heterogeneous Networks,” Proc. Wksp. Mobile Commun. 
mechanisms in the 
in Perspective, Enschede, the Netherlands, Feb. 2001. 
[24] S.-Y. Park et al., “Collaborative QoS Architecture 
physical layer. Therefore, between DiffServ and 802.11e Wireless LAN, 
IEEE VTC ’03-Spring, Jeju, Korea, Apr. 2003. 
[25] M. Li et al., “End-to-end QoS Guarantee in Heterogethe current trend is to 
neous Wired-cum-Wireless Networks,” Tech. rep. no. 
UTDCS-25-04, Univ. of TX at Dallas, July 2004. 
design frameworks that [26] K. K. Leung et al., “Outdoor IEEE 802.11 Cellular Networks: MAC Protocol Design and Performance, 
ICC ’02, vol. 1, Apr. 2002, pp. 595–99. 
can share flow charac[27] S. M. Cherry, “Broadband a Go-Go,” IEEE Spectrum 
June 2003, pp. 20–25. 
teristics across multiple [28] I. Chlamtac, M. Conti, and J. Liu, “Mobile Ad Hoc Networking: Imperatives and Challenges,”  
works J., vol. 1, no. 1, 2003. 
layers and cooperate to 
[29] L. Lamont et al., “Integrating WLANs & MANETs to the 
IPv6 Based Internet,” IEEE ICC ’03, vol. 2, May 2003, 
meet the applications’ pp. 1090–95. 
[30] A. Conti et al., “Bluetooth and IEEE 802.11b Coexistence: Analytical Performance Evaluation in Fading 
QoS requirements. 
Channels,” IEEE JSAC, vol. 21, Feb. 2003, pp. 259 
[31] M. Jaseemuddin, “An Architecture for Integrating 
UMTS and 802.11 WLAN Networks,” IEEE ISCC ’03 
June 2003, pp. 716–23. 
[32] H. Park et al., “Vertical Handoff Procedure and Algorithm between IEEE 802.11 WLAN and CDMA Cellular 
Network,” Mobile Commun.: 7th CDMA Int’l. Conf. 
Seoul, Korea, 2002. 
[33] M. Buddhikot et al., “Integration of 802.11 and ThirdGeneration Wireless Data Networks,” Proc. IEEE INFOCOM 2003. 
[34] X. Lou et al., “An Adaptive Measured-based PreAssignment Scheme with Connection-level QoS Support 
for Mobile Networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. 
vol. 1, no. 3, 2002, pp. 521–30. 
BIOGRAPHIES 
HUA ZHU (zhuhua@utdallas.edu) received a B.S. in electrical 
engineering from Beijing Polytechnic University, China, in 
1998. He received an M.S. in telecommunication engineering in University of Texas at Dallas in 2001. He is now 
working toward a Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering at 
the University of Texas at Dallas, where his research interests include QoS mechanisms for various wireless access 
technologies and wireless multimedia communications. 
14 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Consortium - Algeria (CERIST). Downloaded on June 17,2022 at 22:12:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
A Dynamic Link Adaptation Algo- MING LI (mingli@utdallas.edu) received his B.S. and M.S. in 
 IEEE ICC ’03, engineering from Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China, in 
1995 and 1998, respectively. He is currently a Ph.D. candi[22] B. E. Mullins, N. J. Davis IV, and S. F. Midkiff, “An date in the Department of Computer Science, University of 
Adaptive Wireless Local Area Network Protocol that Texas at Dallas, where he received an M.S. degree in comImproves Throughput via Adaptive Control of Direct puter science in December 2001. His research interests 
ACM SIGMOBILE include QoS schemes for mobile ad hoc networks and mul, vol. 1, no. 3, Sept. timedia over wireless networks. 
Wireless Internet on Het- IMRICH CHLAMTAC [M’86, SM’86, F’93] (chlamtac@utdallas. 
Proc. Wksp. Mobile Commun. edu) received a Ph.D. degree in computer science from the 
, Enschede, the Netherlands, Feb. 2001. University of Minnesota, Minneapolis. Since 1997 he has 
Collaborative QoS Architecture been the Distinguished Chair in Telecommunications, Unibetween DiffServ and 802.11e Wireless LAN,” Proc. versity of Texas at Dallas. He also holds the titles of the 
, Jeju, Korea, Apr. 2003. Sackler Professor at Tel Aviv University, Israel, the Bruno 
End-to-end QoS Guarantee in Heteroge- Kessler Honorary Professor at the University of Trente, 
 Tech. rep. no. Italy, where he is currently on sabbatical, and University 
UTDCS-25-04, Univ. of TX at Dallas, July 2004. Professor at the Technical University of Budapest, HunOutdoor IEEE 802.11 Cellular Net- gary. He has published close to 300 papers in referreed 
works: MAC Protocol Design and Performance,” IEEE journals and conferences, and is the co-author of Local 
Area Networks (Lexington Books, 1981, 1982, 1984) and 
IEEE Spectrum, Mobile and Wireless Networks Protocols and Services 
(Wiley, 2000), and IEEE Network’s 2000 Editor’s Choice. 
Mobile Ad Hoc Net- He serves as the founding Editor-in-Chief of 
 Ad Hoc Net- ACM/URSI/Kluwer Wireless Networks, ACM/Kluwer Mobile 
Networks and Applications, and SPIE/Kluwer Optical NetIntegrating WLANs & MANETs to the works. He is a Fellow of the ACM, a Fulbright Scholar, and 
, vol. 2, May 2003, an IEEE Distinguished Lecturer. He is the winner of the 
2001 ACM Sigmobile annual award and the IEEE ComSoc 
Bluetooth and IEEE 802.11b Coexis- TCPC 2002 Award for contributions to wireless and mobile 
tence: Analytical Performance Evaluation in Fading networks and of multiple best paper awards in wireless 
, vol. 21, Feb. 2003, pp. 259–69. and optical networks. 
An Architecture for Integrating 
IEEE ISCC ’03, 
B. PRABHAKARAN (praba@utdallas.edu) is on the faculty of 
the Computer Science Department, University of Texas at 
Vertical Handoff Procedure and AlgoDallas. He has been working in the area of multimedia sysrithm between IEEE 802.11 WLAN and CDMA Cellular 
tems: animation and multimedia databases, authoring and 
Mobile Commun.: 7th CDMA Int’l. Conf., 
presentation, resource management, and scalable Webbased multimedia presentation servers. He received the 
Integration of 802.11 and Thirdprestigious National Science Foundation CAREER Award in 
Proc. IEEE INFO2003 for his proposal on animation databases. He has published several research papers in various refereed conferAn Adaptive Measured-based Preences and journals in this area. He has served as Associate 
Assignment Scheme with Connection-level QoS Support 
Chair of the ACM Multimedia Conferences in 2003, 2000, 
IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., 
and 1999 He has served as guest editor (special issue on 
Multimedia Authoring and Presentation) for ACM Multimedia Systems. He is also serving on the editorial board of 
Multimedia Tools and Applications, Kluwer. He has also 
(zhuhua@utdallas.edu) received a B.S. in electrical 
served as program committee member on several multimeengineering from Beijing Polytechnic University, China, in 
dia conferences and workshops. He has presented tutorials 
1998. He received an M.S. in telecommunication engineerat ACM Multimedia and other multimedia conferences. He 
ing in University of Texas at Dallas in 2001. He is now 
has served as a visiting research faculty with the Departworking toward a Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering at 
ment of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College 
the University of Texas at Dallas, where his research interPark. He also served as a faculty in the Department of 
ests include QoS mechanisms for various wireless access 
Computer Science, National University of Singapore, and at 
technologies and wireless multimedia communications. 
the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras. 
IEEE Wireless Communications • August 2004 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Consortium - Algeria (CERIST). Downloaded on June 17,2022 at 22:12:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.  
