Abstract —Smart environment is a combination of software 
and hardware (electronic and mechanical) to form a comfortable 
and an evolving place. The smart home is an environment used 
daily by the same people. In fact, these aspects allow the system 
to create a profile for each living person in the environment. This 
profile is a data set that affects the behavior of the system 
according to the user where these data is collected through 
sensors or through PDAs. The environment uses this profile to 
create a comfortable environment for everyone. The system also 
creates some common profiles from personal profiles to be used 
in case there is more than one person in the same place. Smart 
House is a network of things cooperates with each other to 
provide a comfortable environment for humans. This network 
called the internet of things (IoT). The components in the 
internet of things can be physical and virtual devices, sensors or 
actuators. These components are autonomic and have their own 
intelligence characteristics. Our contribution is to propose an 
architecture based on an autonomous and intelligent object using 
multi-agent systems. In this paper, we will address the problem 
of technical assistance of agent-based objects (detection of 
failures) associated with safety and medical assistance in an 
ambient environment which operates 
Keywords —IoT; Multi-agent system; Ambient intelligence; 
Context sensitivity; Smart house. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The Internet of things allows several activities to function 
harmoniously and   creates an « ambient intelligence », 
resulting in significant economic. The IoT represents the 
perceptible aspect of intelligent activities. And connects the 
XXX-X-XXXX-XXXX-X/XX/$XX.00 ©20XX IEEE 
University of Lyon 1, 
Lyon, France 
nadia.kabachi@univ-lyon1.fr 
inter-machine communications constitute the technologies of 
underlying the Internet of the objects. 
The IoT can be applied to several areas [6]: smart cities 
(cities totally or partially connected to the Internet enabling 
them to optimize their capacities such as traffic management 
and water treatment) [8], healthcare, wearable (all portable 
technologies such as connected watches and locators), 
transport, also the work places, production and houses. 
The automation [9] is a set of technics used in the 
buildings to facilitate the centralized control of different 
systems in the house. Moreover, the principle of automation is 
to make sure that the house has become intelligent [7], 
independent, and   reflects on itself.  
All these principles are allowed through the Internet of 
things, which makes it possible to connect the devices of the 
house to a network and to control them remotely. The purpose 
of the automation is to improve the degree of comfort daily by 
automating or managing remotely recurring tasks. To apply 
this communication system we should integrate it into 
household appliances, for example: we can open the windows 
of our house from the office and the same goes with the 
heating, security system, lighting, home appliance and many 
other objects. 
The user can monitor the electronic devices of home by 
sitting anywhere. This system gives security to the user by 
sending a notification. If the user is not at home and intruder 
comes to the house then a sound sensor recognizes that there 
is an intruder and notify the owners. These notifications are 
mitigated through the MQTT protocol [14]. This system is 
developed by using the Raspberry Pi [15]. In addition, the 
system receives commands from mobile to analyze data from 
light, temperature and sound sensors   based on threshold 
values from the sensors to take the appropriate decisions and 
sends the notification to the user. The system is connected to 
the internet through WiFi. 
The paper is organized as follow: in section 1 we will 
introduce the area of our research work, in section 2 we will 
briefly discuss related works. Section 3 describes the proposed 
system architecture and its features, section 4 outlines the 
system implementation of the IoT MAS for ambient 
intelligence. Finally, some conclusions and perspectives are 
presented 
II. RELATED WORKS 
In [11, 12], the authors proposed a smart house simulation 
based on multi-agent system and internet of things using 
UDP/IP protocol for data exchange between the user and the 
house. Moreover, the authors have used Agent communication 
language (ACL) for communication between agents (IoT 
devices), the system is elastic and able to add or remove new 
objects. 
 In [1], the authors proposed an architecture for smart 
house integration IoT with web service using JSON for data 
exchange between system components and Zigbee technology 
for networking. In [2], the authors proposed a ubiquitous 
home controlled and monitoring system using a smart phone. 
In [3] the authors proposed an architecture based on multi 
agent system to provide autonomic characteristics for the 
internet of things (IoT). In [4], the authors developed a 
framework for smart home using a constrained application 
protocol which provides a method to control sensors and 
actuators remotely. 
In [1, 2, 4] as for the architecture used, its main limitation 
concerns the rigid structure in levels for the design of the 
system: it is not modular (it is difficult to make any 
modification to the system) and therefore constitutes a firm 
system. Moreover, there is no cooperation between the system 
components. The objects are however heterogeneous since 
there are different apparatuses so the objects are not 
autonomous. In [2], the system is centralized and the control is 
flexible but the system in general not so. In [11,12] the system 
is decentralized, each object has a significant degree of 
independence and intelligence, the system is a simulation and 
the results obtained cannot be relied upon significantly for the 
simulation of negatives., In [4] we know that the agents need a 
powerful processor and large memory (RAM), but most of the 
things lacking in it. So the multi-agent system cannot be 
incorporated into the object. In the next section, we will 
introduce a new design of a smart house based IoT using 
multi-agent system. 
 
III. PREPARE YOUR PAPER BEFORE STYLING 
This section describes the general architecture of the 
proposed system. Our architecture is based on a multi-agent 
system which imports an autonomy propriety to the proposed 
system [13]. Through this section, we provide a detailed 
description of the different modules that constitute it and the 
mechanisms that are implemented there. We focused on the 
internal architectures of the agents and the adaptation 
mechanisms set up by the agents. 
A. General Architecture 
In this section, we are going to present the global 
architecture of the proposed system (see figure. 1). 
Fig. 1.  General Architecture of our System 
User: The main actors who will be the final users 
of the system, and he can be the persons who live 
in the house. 
Ambient Environment: the ambient 
environment consists of sensors, actuators and the 
components of the house. These objects are able 
to communicate to provide data (measurements) 
or produce a sequence of commands.  
IoT Gateway:  is a device that allowed linking 
the house (things) with external networks (the 
Internet). The IoT Gateway plays the role of 
mediator between the ambient environment 
(networks of things) and the external environment 
(public networks) internet. Moreover, this 
component manages the circulation of 
information in networks and also controls access 
rights to objects and guarantees the criteria of 
computer security against external risks. 
B. Detailed Architecture 
In the previous section, we have described the general 
architecture and the components of our system. This 
architecture will help us to refine the details of the architecture 
of each type of agent. 
1)  Device agent 
The Device agent [10] is embedded in an object such as 
(bulb, fan, refrigerator, geyser..etc), (see Figure 2) it can be 
controlled the component autonomously, adapts and change 
their state according to change of the state of the environment 
and the other objects located in the environment. To overcome 
the limitations of directly manipulated human machine 
interfaces (rigidity, complexity, etc.), Device agent provides 
an adaptation to the user's profile and an ability to anticipate 
their needs (automate certain tasks, recall some useful 
information, etc.). This can be transposed to the collective 
domain. 
Fig. 2. The concrete architecture of the agent embarks in the object 
Environment: Constituted the house and its contents 
such as users, neighboring components (the other 
component located in the same place). 
Sensing module: This unit contains a set of sensors. 
The sensor takes input from the environmental and 
physical changes. Such as temperature/humidity, 
light, sound sensors. After taking the input the 
sensors send the data to the processing module. 
The sensors are devices that are used to 
transform the state of a physical quantity 
(environment) observed in a usable quantity 
(measurements), such as an electrical voltage, a 
mercury height, an intensity or the deviation of a 
needle. The confusion between sensor and transducer 
is often (wrongly): The sensor is at least made up of 
one transducer. 
Processing module:  This unit processes the data 
captured by the sensors and commands sent by the 
user. Through all these instructions, the controller is 
dedicated to do some operations such as opening the 
door or igniting a lamp. 
Control module: This unit receives the orders from 
the processing unit where it is main role to control 
the circuitry from opening and closing. 
IV. IMPLEMENTATION 
We implement our architecture using Raspberry PI Model 
B and the Raspbian operating system. Moreover, with a WIFI 
module for the communication of the device with the other 
devices and with the internet. 
In our work, we have developed a smart home system 
where we can control the light and door using a smartphone. 
In order to implement a security system in absence of the user 
through a notification in case that he has an intruder at home. 
The security system checks whether there is any intruder at 
home, it checks the mike value by a sound sensor. If the mike 
value is higher than the normal then it generates an alert 
message to the user and it turns on the buzzer. 
A. 4.1. The Raspberry Pi  
The Raspberry Pi is a small computer running in Linux 
operating system on SD card for embedded computing 
applications. It is equipped with a Broadcom BCM2836 
processor, four 900 MHz ARMv7 cores, along with 1GB of 
RAM. The expansion connector supports parallel I/O as well 
as most communication buses. Furthermore, Raspberry Pi is a 
particularly economical and powerful support that can be 
easily implemented in small systems requiring access to the 
physical world by sensors / actuators having digital interfaces 
[5]. 
 
Fig. 3. Raspberry PI 2 
The Raspberry Pi is a small version of a computer running 
in Linux. It has USB ports for connecting a keyboard and 
mouse, as well as audio output and HDMI video output for 
connecting a display. Through Raspberry Pi we can connect it 
to a network via its Ethernet port or through USB and/or WiFi 
adapters. The card is powered by a micro USB port. There 
is no hard drive, a microSD card is used as a storage medium. 
It contains the operating system, as well as all your documents 
and programs. Characteristics of the Raspberry Pi 2 card: 
ARM v7 900 MHz quad-core processor. 
1 GB of DDR2 memory. 
Ethernet / RJ45 port, 10.100 BaseT. 
Four USB 2.0 ports. 
HDMI video output. 
Taken for the camera. 
40 pin GPIO connector (all running at 3.3 
V). 
Memory card port: 1 micro SD port. 
1 Micro USB for power supply. 
Analog audio connectors: 1 3.5mm jack 
output. 
B. The electronic system circuit 
We have constructed a miniature model for a smart home. 
This model contains a set of devices (5 lamps, doors, Sound 
sensor, and buzzer). All these elements are connected to the 
Raspberry card. 
Fig. 4. Electronic Circuit Installed in the Environment 
V. CASE STUDY 
The ambient environment is the smart house which 
contains a set of objects connected to the internet (internet of 
things), each object has an embedded agent. In our system, we 
make a prototype of a house and we installed a set of objects 
and sensors, this environment represented by the multi-agent 
system. 
A. Presentation of The Environment 
Figure 5 shows the prototype of the ambient environment 
containing control sensors with the Raspberry PI board driven 
by the agents. 
Fig. 5. External Photo of the Prototype for an Ambient Environment. 
Fig. 6. Internal Photo of the Prototype for an Ambient Environment 
Fig. 7. The Sensors Install in the Environment 
B. System functioning 
1) light Control :The light is opened or closed by an order 
received from the user or from an order issued by the system 
through certain data received from the sensors. 
Fig. 8. Light Control 
2) Door Control : The door opened or closed by an 
order received from the user or from an order issued by 
the system through certain data received by the sensors. 
The door is closed The door is open 
Fig. 9. Door control. 
3) Security system : The security system is activated 
and disabled by the application installed in the 
smartphone. When the system detects the presence of a 
malicious in the house and the security system is activated, 
the system warns the user with the issuance of sounds of 
alert and the system is apply some procedures, such as 
closing doors and windows, cut off the electricity from 
home to avoid the spying of the intruder. 
The security system is disabled The security system is activated 
Entering an intruder Protection procedures 
Fig. 10. Security system 
VI. CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVES   
In this paper, we have presented in the first section a 
smart environment-based on agent system using IoT, in 
the second section, we have introduced our design of the 
architecture of the proposed system. Finally, we have 
highlighted the parts of our system and the main 
interfaces with an explanation of their functionalities. The 
The light is open The light is closed 
originality of the proposed architecture gives many 
advantages compared to the related works, our 
architecture is flexible and able to add or remove 
components without having a problem in the system, there 
is cooperation between the system components and the 
components are autonomous and intelligent. 
As perspectives of this research work, we will integrate 
this platform in the cloud computing environment. In 
addition, we will try to use mobile agents to exchange 
information between the ambient environment and the 
cloud. 
VII. REFERENCES 
[1] Soliman, Moataz, et al. "Smart home: Integrating internet of things with 
web services and cloud computing." Cloud Computing Technology and 
Science (CloudCom), 2013 IEEE 5th International Conference on. Vol. 
2. IEEE, 2013. 
[2] Piyare, Rajeev. "Internet of things: ubiquitous home control and 
monitoring system using android based smart phone." International 
Journal of Internet of Things 2.1 (2013): 5-11. 
[3] Leong, Peter, and Liming Lu. "Multiagent web for the internet of 
things." Information Science and Applications (ICISA), 2014 
International Conference on. IEEE, 2014. 
[4] Joshi, Manveer, and Bikrampal Kaur. "Web Integrated Smart Home 
Infrastructure Using Internet of Things." International Journal of 
Engineering Research and General Science 3.6 (2015). 
[5] Monk, Simon. "Programming Arduino." Tab Electronics, (2012). 
[6] Hortensius, Peter Dirk, and Haaken B. Winbom. "Transceiver for 
extending a CSMA/CD network for wireless communication." U.S. 
Patent No. 5,917,629. 29 Jun. 1999. 
[7] Jiang, Li, Da-You Liu, and Bo Yang. "Smart home research." Machine 
Learning and Cybernetics, 2004. Proceedings of 2004 International 
Conference on. Vol. 2. IEEE, 2004. 
[8] Zanella, Andrea, et al. "Internet of things for smart cities." IEEE Internet 
of Things journal 1.1 (2014): 22-32. 
[9] Ruta, Michele, et al. "Semantic-based enhancement of ISO/IEC 14543-3 
EIB/KNX standard for building automation." IEEE Transactions on 
Industrial Informatics 7.4 (2011): 731-739. 
[10]  Kato, Takumi, et al. "Agent-Oriented Cooperation of IoT Devices 
Towards Advanced Logistics." Computer Software and Applications 
Conference (COMPSAC), 2015 IEEE 39th Annual. Vol.3.IEEE,2015 
[11] Meftah. Zouai, Okba. Kazar, Belgacem. Haba and Hamza. Saouli, 
"Smart house simulation based multi-agent system and internet of 
things," 2017 International Conference on Mathematics and Information 
Technology (ICMIT), Adrar, 2017, pp. 201-203. doi: 
10.1109/MATHIT.2017.8259717 
[12] Zouai. Meftah,Kazar. Okba , Haba. Belgacem, Saouli. Hamza and  
Benfenati. Hind. (2017). IoT Approach Using Multi-Agent System for 
Ambient Intelligence. International Journal of Software Engineering and 
its Applications. 11. 15-32. 10.14257/ijseia.2017.11.9.02. 
[13] Merizig, A., Kazar, O., & Lopez-Sanchez, M. (2018). A Dynamic and 
Adaptable Service Composition Architecture in the Cloud Based on a 
Multi-Agent System. International Journal of Information Technology 
and Web Engineering (IJITWE), 13(1), 50-68. 
[14] Tang, Konglong, et al. "Design and implementation of push notification 
system based on the MQTT protocol." International Conference on 
Information Science and Computer Applications (ISCA 2013). 2013. 
[15] Richardson, Matt, and Shawn Wallace. Getting started with raspberry PI. 
" O'Reilly Media, Inc.", 2012.  